the project gutenberg ebook of the yellow streak, by valentine williams
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  you may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net
title: the yellow streak
author: valentine williams
release date: november 13, 2010 [ebook #9974]
[last updated: july 19, 2011]
language: english
character set encoding: ascii
*** start of this project gutenberg ebook the yellow streak ***
produced by juliet sutherland, dave morgan and the pg
online distributed proofreading team.
the yellow streak
by valentine williams
contents
i. the master of harkings
ii. at twilight
iii. a discovery
iv. between the desk and the window
v. in which bude looks at robin greve
vi. the letter
vii. voices in the library
viii. robin goes to mary
ix. mr. manderton
x. a smoking chimney
xi. "... speed the parting guest!"
xii. mr. manderton is nonplussed
xiii. jeekes
xiv. a sheet of blue paper
xv. shadows
xvi. the intruder
xvii. a fresh clue
xviii. the silent shot
xix. mr. manderton lays his cards on the table
xx. the code king
xxi. a word with mr. jeekes
xxii. the man with the yellow face
xxiii. two's company
xxiv. the metamorphosis of mr. schulz
xxv. the reading of the riddle
xxvi. the figure in the doorway
xxvii. an interruption from beyond
xxviii. the death of hartley parrish
the yellow streak
chapter i
the master of harkings
of all the luxuries of which hartley parrish's sudden rise to wealth
gave him possession, bude, his butler, was the acquisition in which he
took the greatest delight and pride. bude was a large and
comfortable-looking person, triple-chinned like an archdeacon,
bald-headed except for a respectable and saving edging of dark down,
clean-shaven, benign of countenance, with a bold nose which to the
psychologist bespoke both ambition and inborn cleverness. he had a
thin, tight mouth which in itself alone was a symbol of discreet
reticence, the hall-mark of the trusted family retainer.
bude had spent his life in the service of the english aristocracy. the
earl of tipperary, major-general lord bannister, the dowager marchioness
of wiltshire, and sir herbert marcobrunner, bart., had in turn watched
his gradual progress from pantry-boy to butler. bude was a man whose
maxim had been the french saying, "_je prends mon bien ou je le
trouve_."
in his thirty years' service he had always sought to discover and draw
from those sources of knowledge which were at his disposal. from
mactavish, who had supervised lord tipperary's world-famous gardens, he
had learnt a great deal about flowers, so that the arrangement of the
floral decorations was always one of the features at hartley parrish's
_soigne_ dinner-parties. from brun, the unsurpassed _chef_, whom lord
bannister had picked up when serving with the guards in egypt, he had
gathered sufficient knowledge of the higher branches of the cuisine to
enable hartley parrish to leave the arrangement of the menu in his
butler's hands.
bude would have been the first to admit that, socially speaking, his
present situation was not the equal of the positions he had held. there
was none of the staid dignity about his present employer which was
inborn in men like lord tipperary or lord bannister, and which sir
herbert marcobrunner, with the easy assimilative faculty of his race,
had very successfully acquired. below middle height, thick-set and
powerfully built, with a big head, narrow eyes, and a massive chin,
hartley parrish, in his absorbed concentration on his business, had no
time for the acquisition or practice of the eton manner.
it was characteristic of parrish that, seeing bude at a dinner-party at
marcobrunner's, he should have engaged him on the spot. it took bude a
week to get over his shock at the manner in which the offer was made.
parrish had approached him as he was supervising the departure of the
guests. waving aside the footman who offered to help him into his
overcoat, parrish had asked bude point-blank what wages he was getting.
bude mentioned the generous remuneration he was receiving from sir
herbert marcobrunner, whereupon parrish had remarked:
"come to me and i'll double it. i'll give you a week to think it over.
let my secretary know!"
after a few discreet enquiries, bude, faithful to his maxim, had
accepted parrish's offer. marcobrunner was furiously angry, but, being
anxious to interest parrish in a deal, sagely kept his feelings to
himself. and bude had never regretted the change. he found parrish an
exacting, but withal a just and a generous master, and he was not long
in realizing that, as long as he kept harkings, parrish's country place
where he spent the greater part of his time, running smoothly according
to parrish's schedule, he could count on a life situation.
the polish of manner, the sober dignity of dress, acquired from years of
acute observation in the service of the nobility, were to be seen as, at
the hour of five, in the twilight of this bleak autumn afternoon, bude
moved majestically into the lounge-hall of harkings and leisurely
pounded the gong for tea.
the muffled notes of the gong swelled out brazenly through the silent
house. they echoed down the softly carpeted corridors to the library
where the master of the house sat at his desk. for days he had been
immersed in the figures of the new issue which hornaway's, the vast
engineering business of his creation, was about to put on the market.
they reverberated up the fine old oak staircase to the luxurious louis
xv bedroom, where lady margaret trevert lay on her bed idly smiling
through an amusing novel. they crashed through the thickly padded baize
doors leading to the servants' hall, where, at sixpence a hundred,
parrish's man, jay, was partnering lady margaret's maid against mrs.
heever, the housekeeper, and robert, the chauffeur, at a friendly game
of bridge. and they even boomed distantly into the far-away
billiard-room and broke into the talk which robin greve was having with
mary trevert.
"damn!" exclaimed greve savagely, as the distant gonging came to his
ears.
"it's the gong for tea," said mary demurely.
she was sitting on one of the big leather sofas lining the long room.
robin, as he gazed down at her from where he stood with his back against
the edge of the billiard-table, thought what an attractive picture she
made in the half-light.
the lamps over the table were lit, but the rest of the room was almost
dark. in that lighting the thickly waving dark hair brought out the fine
whiteness of the girl's skin. there was love, and a great desire for
love, in her large dark eyes, but the clear-cut features, the
well-shaped chin, and the firm mouth, the lips a little full, spoke of
ambition and the love of power.
"i've been here three whole days," said robin, "and i've not had two
words with you alone, mary. and hardly have i got you to myself for a
quiet game of pills when that rotten gong goes ..."
"i'm sorry you're disappointed at missing your game," the girl replied
mischievously, "but i expect you will be able to get a game with horace
or one of the others after tea ..."
robin kicked the carpet savagely.
"you know perfectly well i don't want to play billiards ..."
he looked up and caught the girl's eye. for a fraction of a second he
saw in it the expression which every man at least once in his life looks
to see in the eyes of one particular woman. in the girl's dark-blue eyes
fringed with long black lashes he saw the dumb appeal, the mute
surrender, which, as surely as the white flag on the battlements in war,
is the signal of capitulation in woman.
but the expression was gone on the instant. it passed so swiftly that,
for a second, robin, seeing the gently mocking glance that succeeded it,
wondered whether he had been mistaken.
but he was a man of action--a glance at his long, well-moulded head, his
quick, wide-open eye, and his square jaw would have told you that--and
he spoke.
"it's no use beating about the bush," he said. "mary, i've got so fond
of you that i'm just miserable when you're away from me ..."
"oh, robin, please ..."
mary trevert stood up and remained standing, her head turned a little
away from him, a charming silhouette in her heather-blue shooting-suit.
the young man took her listless hand.
"my dear," he said, "you and i have been pals all our lives. it was
only at the front that i began to realize just how much you meant to me.
and now i know i can't do without you. i've never met any one who has
been to me just what you are. and, mary, i must have you as my wife ..."
the girl remained motionless. she kept her face averted. the room seemed
very still.
"oh, robin, please ..." she murmured again.
resolutely the young man put an arm about her and drew her to him.
slowly, reluctantly, she let him have his way. but she would not look at
him.
"oh, my dear," he whispered, kissing her hair, "don't you care a
little?"
she remained silent.
"won't you look at me, mary?"
there was a hint of huskiness in his voice. he raised her face to his.
"i saw in your eyes just now that you cared for me," he whispered; "oh,
my mary, say that you do!"
then he bent down and kissed her. for a brief instant their lips met and
he felt the caress of the girl's arm about his neck.
"oh, robin!" she said.
that was all.
but then she drew away.
reluctantly the man let her go. the colour had faded from his cheeks
when she looked at him again as he stood facing her in the twilight of
the billiard-room.
"robin, dear," she said, "i'm going to hurt you."
the young man seemed to have had a premonition of what was coming, for
he betrayed no sign of surprise, but remained motionless, very erect,
very pale.
"dear," said the girl with a little despairing shrug, "it's hopeless! we
can't afford to marry!"
"not yet, i know," said robin, "but i'm getting on well, mary, and in
another year or two ..."
the girl looked down at the point of her little brogue shoe.
"i don't know what you will think of me," she said, "but i can't
accept ... i can't face ... i ..."
"you can't face the idea of being the wife of a man who has his way to
make. is that it?"
the voice was rather stern.
the girl looked up impulsively.
"i can't, robin. i should never make you happy. mother and i are as poor
as church-mice. all the money in the family goes to keep horace in the
army and pay for my clothes."
she looked disdainfully at her pretty suit.
"all this," she went on with a little hopeless gesture indicating her
tailor-made, "is mother's investment. no, no, it's true ... i can tell
you as a friend, robin, dear, we are living on our capital until i have
caught a rich husband ..."
"oh, my dear," said robin softly, "don't say things like that ..."
the girl laughed a little defiantly.
"but it's true," she answered. "the war has halved mother's income and
there's nothing between us and bankruptcy but a year or so ... unless i
get married!"
her voice trembled a little and she turned away.
"mary," said the young man hoarsely, "for god's sake, don't do that!"
he moved a step towards her, but she drew back.
"it's all right," she said with the tears glistening wet on her face,
and dabbed at her eyes with her tiny handkerchief, "but, oh, robin boy,
why couldn't you have held your tongue?"
"i suppose i had no right to speak ..." the young man began.
the girl sighed.
"i oughtn't to say it ... now," she said slowly, and looked across at
robin with shining eyes, "but, robin dear, i'm ... i'm glad you did!"
she paused a moment as though turning something over in her mind.
"i've ... i've got something to tell you, robin," she began. "no, stay
where you are! we must be sensible now."
she paused and looked at him.
"robin," she said slowly, "i've promised to marry somebody else ..."
there was a moment's silence.
"who is it?" robin asked in a hard voice.
the girl made no answer.
"who is it? do i know him?"
still the girl was silent, but she gave a hardly perceptible nod.
"not ...? no, no, mary, it isn't true? it can't be true?"
the girl nodded, her eyes to the ground.
"it's a secret still," she said. "no one knows but mother. hartley
doesn't want it announced yet!"
the sound of the christian name suddenly seemed to infuriate greve.
"by god!" he cried, "it shan't be! you must be mad, mary, to think of
marrying a man like hartley parrish. a fellow who's years older than
you, who thinks of nothing but money, who stood out of the war and made
a fortune while men of his own age were doing the fighting for him! it's
unthinkable ... it's ... it's damnable to think of a gross, ill-bred
creature like parrish ..."
"robin!" the girl cried, "you seem to forget that we're staying in his
house. in spite of all you say he seems to be good enough for you to
come and stay with ..."
"i only came because you were to be here. you know that perfectly well.
i admit one oughtn't to blackguard one's host, but, mary, you must see
that this marriage is absolutely out of the question!"
the girl began to bridle up,
"why?" she asked loftily.
"because ... because parrish is not the sort of man who will make you
happy ..."
"and why not, may i ask? he's very kind and very generous, and i believe
he likes me ..."
robin greve made a gesture of despair.
"my dear girl," he said, trying to control himself to speak quietly,
"what do you know about this man? nothing. but there are beastly stories
circulating about his life ..."
mary trevert laughed cynically.
"my dear old robin," she said, "they tell stories about every bachelor.
and i hardly think you are an unbiassed judge ..."
robin greve was pacing up and down the floor.
"you're crazy, mary," he said, stopping in front of her, "to dream you
can ever be happy with a man like hartley parrish. the man's a ruthless
egoist. he thinks of nothing but money and he's out to buy you just
exactly as you ..."
"as i am ready to sell myself!" the girl echoed. "and i _am_ ready,
robin. it's all very well for you to stand there and preach ideals at
me, but i'm sick and disgusted at the life we've been leading for the
past three years, hovering on the verge of ruin all the time, dunned by
tradesmen and having to borrow even from servants ... yes, from old
servants of the family ... to pay mother's bridge debts. mother's a good
sort. father spent all her money for her and she was brought up in
exactly the same helpless way as she brought up me. i can do absolutely
nothing except the sort of elementary nursing which we all learnt in the
war, and if i don't marry well mother will have to keep a boarding-house
or do something ghastly like that. i'm not going to pretend that i'm
thinking only of her, because i'm not. i can't face a long engagement
with no prospects except castles in spain. i don't mean to be callous,
robin, but i expect i am naturally hard. hartley parrish is a good sort.
he's very fond of me, and he will see that mother lives comfortably for
the rest of her life. i've promised to marry him because i like him and
he's a suitable match. and i don't see by what right you try and run him
down to me behind his back! if it's jealousy, then it shows a very petty
spirit!"
robin greve stepped close up to mary trevert. his eyes were very angry
and his jaw was set very square.
"if you are determined to sell yourself to the highest bidder," he said,
"i suppose there's no stopping you. but you're making a mistake. if
parrish were all you claim for him, you might not repent of his marriage
so long as you did not care for somebody else. but i know you love me,
and it breaks my heart to see you blundering into everlasting
unhappiness ..."
"at least hartley will be able to keep me," the girl flashed out.
directly she had spoken she regretted her words.
a red flush spread slowly over robin greve's face.
then he laughed drily.
"you won't be the first woman he's kept!" he retorted, and stamped out
of the billiard-room.
the girl gave a little gasp. then she reddened with anger.
"how dare he?" she cried, stamping her foot; "how dare he?"
she sank on the lounge and, burying her face in her hands, burst into
tears.
"oh, robin, robin, dear!" she sobbed--incomprehensibly, for she was a
woman.
chapter ii
at twilight
there is a delicious snugness, a charming lack of formality, about the
ceremony of afternoon tea in an english country-house--it is much too
indefinite a rite to dignify it by the name of meal--which makes it the
most pleasant reunion of the day. for english country-house parties
consist, for the most part, of a succession of meals to which the guests
flock the more congenially as, in the interval, they have contrived to
avoid one another's companionship.
and so, scarcely had the last reverberation of bude's measured gonging
died away than the french window leading from the lounge-hall on to the
terrace was pushed open and two of hartley parrish's guests emerged from
the falling darkness without into the pleasant comfort of the firelit
room.
they were an oddly matched pair. the one was a tubby little man with
short bristly grey hair and a short bristly grey moustache to match. his
stumpy legs looked ridiculous in his baggy golf knickers of rough tweed,
which he wore with gaiters extending half-way up his short, stout
calves. as he came in, he slung off the heavy tweed shooting-cloak he
had been wearing and placed it with his homburg hat on a chair.
this was dr. romain, whose name thus written seems indecently naked
without the string of complementary initials indicative of the honours
and degrees which years of bacteriological research had heaped upon him.
his companion was a tall, slim, fair-haired young man, about as good a
specimen of the young englishman turned out by the english public school
as one could find. he was extremely good-looking with a proud eye and
finely chiselled features, but the suggestion of youth in his face and
figure was countered by a certain poise, a kind of latent seriousness
which contrasted strangely with the general cheery _insouciance_ of his
type.
a soldier would have spotted the symptoms at once, "five years of war!"
would have been his verdict--that long and strange entry into life of so
many thousands of england's manhood which impressed the stamp of
premature seriousness on all those who came through. and captain sir
horace trevert, bart., d.s.o., had gone from his famous school straight
into a famous regiment, had won his decoration before he was twenty-one,
and been twice wounded into the bargain.
"where's everybody?" queried the doctor, rubbing his hands at the
blazing log-fire.
"robin and mary went off to play billiards," said the young man, "and i
left old parrish after lunch settling down for an afternoon's work in
the library ..."
he crossed the room to the fire and stood with his back to the flame.
"what a worker that man is!" ejaculated the doctor. "he had one of his
secretaries down this morning with a car full of portfolios,
blue-prints, specifications, and god knows what else. parrish polished
the whole lot off and packed the fellow back to london before mid-day.
some of hornaway's people who were waiting went in next, and he was
through with them by lunch-time!"
trevert wagged his head in admiration.
"and he told me he wanted to have a quiet week-end!" he said. "that's
why he has no secretary living in the house."
"a quiet week-end!" repeated romain drily. "ye gods!"
"he's a marvel for work," said the young man.
"he certainly is," replied the doctor. "he's done wonders with
hornaway's. when he took the place over at the beginning of the war,
they were telling me, it was a little potty concern making toy air guns
or lead soldiers or something of the sort. and they never stop coining
money now, it seems. parrish must be worth millions ..."
"lucky devil!" said trevert genially.
"ah!" observed the doctor sententiously, "but he's had to work for it,
mark you! he's had the most extraordinary life, they tell me. he was at
one period of his career a bartender on the rand, a man was saying at
the club the other day. but most of his life he's lived in canada, i
gather. he was telling us the other evening, before you and mary came
down, that he was once a brakeman on the canadian pacific railway. he
said he invested all his savings in books on engineering and read them
in his brakeman's van on his trips across the dominion. ah! he's a fine
fellow!"
he lowered his voice discreetly.
"and a devilish good match, eh, horace?"
the young man flushed slightly.
"yes," he said unwillingly.
"a dam' good match for somebody," urged the doctor with a malicious
twinkle in his eye.
"here, doc," said horace, suddenly turning on him, "you stick to your
bugs and germs. what do you know about matchmaking, anyway?"
dr. romain chuckled.
"we bacteriologists are trained observers. one learns a lot watching the
life and habits of the bacillus, horace, my boy. and between ourselves,
parrish would be a lucky fellow if ..."
trevert turned to him. his face was quite serious, and there was a
little touch of hauteur in his voice. he was the 17th baronet.
"my dear doc," he said, "aren't you going a bit fast? parrish is a very
good chap, but one knows nothing about him ..."
sagely the doctor nodded his grizzled head.
"that's true," he agreed. "he appears to have no relatives and nobody
over here seems to have heard of him before the war. a man was saying at
the athenaeum the other day ..."
trevert touched his elbow. bude had appeared, portly, imperturbable,
bearing a silver tray set out with the appliances for tea.
"bude," cried trevert, "don't tell me there are no tea-cakes again!"
"on the contrairey, sir," answered the butler in the richly sonorous
voice pitched a little below the normal register which he employed
abovestairs, "the cook has had her attention drawn to it. there are
tea-cakes, sir!"
with a certain dramatic effect--for bude was a trifle theatrical in
everything he did--he whipped the cover off a dish and displayed a
smoking pile of deliciously browned scones.
"bude," said trevert, "when i'm a field marshal, i'll see you get the
o.b.e. for this!"
the butler smiled a nicely regulated three-by-one smile, a little
deprecatory as was his wont. then, like a tank taking a corner, he
wheeled majestically and turned to cross the lounge. to reach the green
baize door leading to the servants' quarters he had to cross the outer
hall from which led corridors on the right and left. that on the right
led to the billiard-room; that on the left to the big drawing-room with
the library beyond.
as bude reached the great screen of tooled spanish leather which
separated a corner of the lounge from the outer hall, robin greve came
hastily through the glass door of the corridor leading from the
billiard-room. the butler with a pleasant smile drew back a little to
allow the young man to pass, thinking he was going into the lounge for
tea.
"tea is ..." he began, but abruptly ended the sentence on catching sight
of the young man's face. for robin, habitually so self-possessed, looked
positively haggard. his face was set and there was a weary look in his
eyes. the young man appeared so utterly different from his wonted self
that bude fairly stared at him.
but robin, without paying the least attention either to the butler or to
the sound of voices in the lounge, strode across the outer hall and
disappeared through the glass door of the corridor leading to the great
drawing-room and the library.
bude stood an instant gazing after him in perplexity, then moved across
the hall to the servants' quarters.
in the meantime in the lounge the little doctor snapped the case of his
watch and opined that he wanted his tea.
"where on earth has everybody got to? what's become of lady margaret? i
haven't seen her since lunch...."
that lady answered his question by appearing in person.
lady margaret was tall and hard and glittering. like so many
englishwomen of good family, she was so saturated with the traditions of
her class that her manner was almost indistinguishable from that of a
man. well-mannered, broadminded, wholly cynical, and absolutely
fearless, she went through life exactly as though she were following a
path carefully taped out for her by a suitably instructed providence.
somewhere beneath the mask of smiling indifference she presented so
bravely to a difficult world, she had a heart, but so carefully did she
hide it that horace had only discovered it on a certain grey november
morning when he had started out for the first time on active service.
for ever afterwards a certain weighing-machine at waterloo station, by
which he had had a startling vision of his mother standing with heaving
bosom and tear-stained face, possessed in his mind the attributes of
some secret and sacred shrine.
but now she was cool and well-gowned and self-contained as ever.
"what a perfectly dreadful day!" she exclaimed in her pleasant,
well-bred voice. "horace, you must positively go and see henry
what's-his-name in the foreign office and get me a passport for cannes.
the weather in england in the winter is incredibly exaggerated!"
"at least," said the doctor, rubbing his back as he warmed himself at
the fire, "we have fuel in england. give me england, climate and all,
but don't take away my fire. the sun doesn't shine on the riviera at
night, you know!"
lady margaret busied herself at the tea-table with its fine queen anne
silver and dainty yellow cups. it was the custom at harkings to serve
tea in the winter without other illumination than the light of the
great log-fire that spat and leaped in the open hearth. beyond the
semi-circle of ruddy light the great lounge was all in darkness, and
beyond that again was the absolute stillness of the english country on a
winter's evening.
and so with a gentle clatter of teacups and the accompaniment of
pleasantly modulated voices they sat and chatted--lady margaret, who was
always surprising in what she said, the doctor who was incredibly
opinionated, and young trevert, who like all of the younger generation
was daringly flippant. he was airing his views on what he called "boche
music" when he broke off and cried:
"hullo, here's mary! mary, you owe me half a crown. bude has come up to
scratch and there are tea-cakes after ... but, i say, what on earth's
the matter?"
the girl had come into the room and was standing in the centre of the
lounge in the ruddy glow of the fire. her face was deathly pale and she
was shuddering violently. she held her little cambric handkerchief
crushed up into a ball to her lips. her eyes were fixed, almost glazed,
like one who walks in a trance.
she stood like that for an instant surveying the group--lady margaret, a
silver tea-pot in one hand, looking at her with uplifted brows. horace,
who in his amazement had taken a step forward, and the doctor at his
side scrutinizing her beneath his shaggy eyebrows.
"my dear mary "--it was lady margaret's smooth and pleasant voice which
broke the silence--"whatever is the matter? have you seen a ghost!"
the girl swayed a little and opened her lips as if to speak. a log,
crashing from the fire into the grate, fell upon the silence of the
darkening room. it seemed to break the spell.
"hartley!"
the name came hoarsely from the girl. everybody, except lady margaret,
sprang to his feet it was the doctor who spoke first.
"miss mary," he said, "you seem frightened, what ..."
his voice was very soothing.
mary trevert made a vague gesture towards the shadows about the
staircase.
"there ... in the library ... he's got the door locked ... there was a
shot ..."
then she suddenly screamed aloud.
in a stride both the doctor and her brother were by her side. but she
motioned them away.
"i'm frightened about hartley," she said in a low voice, "please go at
once and see what ... that shot ... and he doesn't answer!"
"come on, doctor!"
horace trevert was halfway to the big screen separating the lounge from
the outer hall. as he passed the bell, he pressed it.
"send bude to us, mother, when he comes, please!" he called as he and
the doctor hurried away.
lady margaret had risen and stood, one arm about her daughter, on the
persian rug spread out before the cheerful fire. so the women stood in
the firelight in hartley parrish's house, surrounded by all the
treasures which his wealth had bought, and listened to the footsteps
clattering away through the silence.
chapter iii
a discovery
harkings was not a large house. some three hundred years ago it had been
a farm, but in the intervening years successive owners had so altered it
by pulling down and building on, that, when it passed into the
possession of hartley parrish, little else than the open fireplace in
the lounge remained to tell of the original farm. it was a queer,
rambling house of only two stories whose elongated shape was accentuated
by the additional wing which hartley parrish had built on.
for the decoration of his country-house, parrish had placed himself
unreservedly in the hands of the firm entrusted with the work. their
architect was given _carte blanche_ to produce a house of character out
of the rather dingy, out-of-date country villa which harkings was when
hartley parrish, attracted by the view from the gardens, first
discovered it.
the architect had gone to his work with a zest. he had ripped up walls
and ceilings and torn down irrational matchwood partitions, discovering
some fine old oak wainscot and the blackened roof-beams of the original
farmstead. in the upshot he transformed harkings into a very fair
semblance of a late jacobean house, fitted with every modern convenience
and extremely comfortable. furnished throughout with genuine "period"
furniture, with fine dark oak panelling and parquet floors, it was
altogether picturesque. neither within nor without, it is true, would a
connoisseur have been able to give it a date.
but that did not worry hartley parrish. he loved a bargain and he had
bought the house cheap. it was situated in beautiful country and was
within easy reach by car of his town-house in st. james's square where
he lived for the greater part of the week. last but not least harkings
was the casket enshrining a treasure, the realization of a lifelong
wish. this was the library, parrish's own room, designed by himself and
furnished to his own individual taste.
it stood apart from the rest of the house at the end of the wing which
parrish had constructed. the wing consisted of a single ground floor and
contained the drawing-room--which was scarcely ever used, as both
parrish and his guests preferred the more congenial surroundings of the
lounge--and the library. a long corridor panelled in oak led off the
hall to the new wing. on to this corridor both the drawing-room and the
library gave. halfway down the corridor a small passage ran off. it
separated the drawing-room from the library and ended in a door leading
into the gardens at the back of the house.
it was to the new wing that horace trevert and dr. romain now hastened.
they hurried across the hall, where the big lamp of dulled glass threw a
soft yellow light, and entered the corridor through the heavy oak door
which shut it off from the hall. the corridor was wrapt in silence.
halfway down, where the small passage ran to the garden door, the
electric light was burning.
horace trevert ran down the corridor ahead of the doctor and was the
first to reach the library door. he knocked sharply, then turned the
handle. the door was locked.
"hartley!" he cried and rapped again. "ha-a-artley! open the door! it's
me, horace!"
again he knocked and rattled the handle. not a sound came from the
locked room. there was an instant's silence. horace and the doctor
exchanged an interrogatory look.
from behind the closed door came the steady ticking of a clock. the
silence was so absolute that both men heard it.
then the door at the end of the corridor was flung open and bude
appeared. he was running at a quick ambling trot, his heavy tread
shaking the passage.
"oh? sir," he cried, "whatever is it? what has happened?"
horace spoke quickly, incisively.
"something's happened to mr. parrish, bude," he said. "the door's locked
and he doesn't answer. we'll have to break the door down."
bude shook his head.
"it's solid oak, sir," he began.
then he raised his hand.
"pardon me, gentlemen," he said, as though an idea had struck him. "if
we were to go out by the garden door here, we might get in through the
window. we could break the glass if needs be!"
"that's it!" exclaimed horace. "come on, doctor!"
he dashed down the corridor towards the little passage. the doctor laid
a hand on bude's arm.
"one of us had better stay here," he said with a meaning glance at the
closed door.
the butler raised an affrighted face to his.
"go with sir horace, bude," said the doctor. "i'll stay!"
outside in the gardens of harkings it was a raw, damp evening,
pitch-black now, with little gusts of wind which shook the naked bushes
of the rosery. the garden door led by a couple of shallow steps on to a
gravel path which ran all along the back of the house. the path extended
right up to the wall of the house. on the other side it flanked the
rosery.
the glass door was banging to and fro in the night wind as bude, his
coat-collar turned up, hurried out into the darkness. the library, which
formed the corner of the new wing, had two windows, the one immediately
above the gravel path looking out over the rosery, the other round the
corner of the house giving on the same path, beyond which ran a high
hedge of clipped box surrounding the so-called pleasure ground, a plot
of smooth grass with a sundial in the centre.
a glow of light came from the library window, and in its radiance bude
saw silhouetted the tall, well-knit figure of young trevert. as the
butler came up, the boy raised something in his hand and there was a
crash of broken glass.
the curtains were drawn, but with the breaking of the window they began
to flap about. with the iron grating he had picked up from the drain
below the window young trevert smashed the rest of the glass away, then
thrust an arm through the empty window-frame, fumbling for the
window-catch.
"the catch is not fastened," he whispered, and with a resolute thrust he
pushed the window up. the curtains leapt up wildly, revealing a glimpse
of the pleasant, book-lined room. both men from the darkness without saw
parrish's desk littered with his papers and his habitual chair beyond
it, pushed back empty.
trevert turned an instant, a hand on the window-sill.
"bude," he said, "there's no one there!"
"best look and see, sir," replied the butler, his coat-tails flapping in
the wind.
trevert hoisted himself easily on to the window-sill, knelt there for an
instant, then thrust his legs over the sill and dropped into the room.
as he did so he stumbled, cried aloud.
then the heavy grey curtains were flung back and the butler saw the
boy's face, rather white, at the open window.
"my god," he said slowly, "he's dead!"
a moment later dr. romain, waiting in the corridor, heard the key turn
in the lock of the library door. the door was flung open. horace trevert
stood there, silhouetted in a dull glow of light from the room. he was
pointing to the open window, beneath which hartley parrish lay on his
back motionless.
chapter iv
between the desk and the window
hartley parrish's library was a splendid room, square in shape, lofty
and well proportioned. it was lined with books arranged in shelves of
dark brown oak running round the four walls, but sunk level with them
and reaching up to a broad band of perfectly plain white plasterwork.
it was a cheerful, comfortable, eminently modern room, half library,
half office. the oak was solid, but uncompromisingly new. the great
leather armchairs were designed on modern lines--for comfort rather
than for appearance. there were no pictures; but vases of chrysanthemums
stood here and there about the room. a dictaphone in a case was in a
corner, but beside it was a little table on which were set out some rare
bits of old chelsea. there was also a gramophone, but it was enclosed in
a superb case of genuine old black-and-gold lacquer. the very books in
their shelves carried on this contrast of business with recreation. for
while one set of shelves contained row upon row of technical works,
company reports, and all manner of business reference books bound in
leather, on another were to be found the vellum-bound volumes of the
kelmscott press.
a sober note of grey or mole colour was the colour scheme of the room.
the heavy pile carpet which stretched right up to the walls was of this
quiet neutral shade: so were the easy-chairs, and the colour of the
heavy curtains, which hung in front of the two high windows, was in
harmony with the restful decorative scheme of the room.
the massive oaken door stood opposite the window overlooking the
rosery--the window through which horace trevert had entered. parrish's
desk was in front of this window, between it and the door in
consequence. by the other window, which, as has been stated, looked out
on the clipped hedge surrounding the pleasure ground, was the little
table with the chelsea china, the dictaphone, and one of the
easy-chairs. the centre of the room was clear so that nothing lay
between the door and the carved mahogany chair at the desk. here, as
they all knew, parrish was accustomed to sit when working, his back to
the door, his face to the window overlooking the rosery.
the desk stood about ten feet from the window. on it was a large brass
lamp which cast a brilliant circle of light upon the broad flat top of
the desk with its orderly array of letter-trays, its handsome
silver-edged blotter and silver and tortoise-shell writing
appurtenances. by the light of this lamp dr. romain, looking from the
doorway, saw that hartley parrish's chair was vacant, pushed back a
little way from the desk. the rest of the room was wrapt in unrevealing
half-light.
"he's there by the window!"
horace was whispering to the doctor. romain strode over to the desk and
picked up the lamp. as he did so, his eyes fell upon the pale face of
hartley parrish. he lay on his back in the space between the desk and
the window. his head was flung back, his eyes, bluish-grey,--the narrow,
rather expressionless eyes of the successful business man,--were wide
open and fixed in a sightless stare, his rather full mouth, with its
clean-shaven lips, was rigid and stern. with the broad forehead, the
prominent brows, the bold, aggressive nose, and the square bony jaw, it
was a fighter's face, a fine face save for the evil promise of that
sensuous mouth. so thought the doctor with the swift psychological
process of his trade.
from the face his gaze travelled to the body. and then romain could not
repress an involuntary start, albeit he saw what he had half expected to
see. the fleshy right hand of hartley parrish grasped convulsively an
automatic pistol. his clutching index finger was crooked about the
trigger and the barrel was pressed into the yielding pile of the carpet.
his other hand with clawing fingers was flung out away from the body on
the other side. one leg was stretched out to its fullest extent and the
foot just touched the hem of the grey window curtains. the other leg was
slightly drawn up.
the doctor raised the lamp from the desk and, dropping on one knee,
placed it on the ground beside the body. with gentle fingers he
manipulated the eyes, opened the blue serge coat and waistcoat which
parrish was wearing. as he unbuttoned the waistcoat, he laid bare a dark
red stain on the breast of the fine silk shirt. he opened shirt and
under-vest, bent an ear to the still form, and then, with a little
helpless gesture, rose to his feet.
"dead?" queried trevert.
romain nodded shortly.
"shot through the heart!" he said.
"he looked so ... so limp," the boy said, shrinking back a little, "i
thought he was dead. but i never thought old hartley would have done a
thing like that ..."
the doctor pursed up his lips as if to speak. but he remained silent for
a moment. then he said:
"horace, the police must be informed. we can do that on the telephone.
this room must be left just as it is until they come. i can do nothing
more for poor hartley. and we shall have to tell the others. i'd better
do that myself. i wonder where greve is? i haven't seen him all the
afternoon. as a barrister he should be able to advise us about--er, the
technicalities: the police and all that ..."
rapid footsteps reverberated down the corridor. robin greve appeared at
the door. the fat and frightened face of bude appeared over his
shoulder.
"good god, doctor!" he cried, "what's this bude tells me?"
the doctor cleared his throat.
"our poor friend is dead, greve," he said.
"but how? how?"
greve stood opposite the doctor in the centre of the library. he had
switched on the light at the door as he had come in, and the room was
flooded with soft light thrown by concealed lamps set around the cornice
of the ceiling.
"look!" responded the doctor by way of answer and stepped aside to let
the young man come up to the desk. "he has a pistol in his hand!"
robin greve took a step forward and stopped dead. he gazed for an
instant without speaking on the dead face of his host and rival.
"suicide!"
it was an affirmation rather than a question, and the little doctor took
it up. he was not a young man and the shock and the excitement were
beginning to tell on his nerves.
"i am not a police surgeon," he said with some asperity; "in fact, i may
say i have not seen a dead body since my hospital days. i ... i ... know
nothing about these things. this is a matter for the police. they must
be summoned at once. where's bude?"
robin greve turned quickly.
"get on to the police station at stevenish at once, bude," he ordered.
"do you know the inspector?"
"yessir," the butler answered in a hollow voice. his hands were
trembling violently, and he seemed to control himself with difficulty.
"mr. humphries, sir!"
"well, ring him up and tell him that mr. parrish ... hullo, what do all
these people want?"
there was a commotion at the door. frightened faces were framed in the
doorway. outside there was the sound of a woman whimpering. a tall, dark
young man in a tail coat came in quickly. he stopped short when he saw
the solemn faces of the group at the desk. it was parrish's man, jay.
he stepped forward to the desk and in a frightened sort of way peered at
the body as it lay on the floor.
"oh, sir," he said breathlessly, addressing greve, "what ever has
happened to mr. parrish? it can't be true ..."
greve put his hand on the young man's shoulder.
"i'm sorry to say it is true, jay," he answered.
"he was very good to us all," the valet replied in a broken voice. he
remained by the desk staring at the body in a dazed fashion.
"who is that crying outside?" greve demanded. "this is no place for
women ..."
"it's mrs. heever, the housekeeper," bude answered.
"well, she must go back to her room. send all those servants away. jay,
will you see to it? and take care that lady margaret and miss trevert
don't come in here, either."
"sir horace is with them, sir, in the lounge," said jay and went out.
"i'll go to them. i think i'd better," exclaimed the doctor. "i shall be
in the lounge when they want me. a dreadful affair! dreadful!"
the little doctor bustled out, leaving greve and the butler alone in the
room with the mortal remains of hartley parrish lying where he had
fallen on the soft grey carpet.
"now, bude," said greve incisively, "get on to the police at once. you'd
better telephone from the servant's hall. i'll have a look round here in
the meantime!"
bude stood for an instant irresolute. he glanced shrewdly at the young
man.
"go on," said robin quickly; "what are you waiting for, man? there's no
time to lose."
slowly the butler turned and tiptoed away, his ungainly body swaying
about as he stole across the heavy pile carpet. he went out of the room,
closing the door softly behind him. he left greve sunk in a reverie at
the desk, gazing with unseeing eyes upon the dead face of the master of
harkings.
that sprawling corpse, the startled realization of death stamped for
ever in the wide, staring eyes, was indeed a subject for meditation.
there, in the midst of all the evidences of hartley parrish's meteoric
rise to affluence and power, greve pondered for an instant on the
strange pranks which fate plays us poor mortals.
parrish had risen, as greve and all the world knew, from the bottom rung
of the ladder. he had had a bitter fight for existence, had made his
money, as greve had heard, with a blind and ruthless determination
which spoke of the stern struggle of other days. and robin, who, too,
had had his own way to make in the world, knew how the memory of earlier
struggles went to sweeten the flavour of ultimate success.
yet here was hartley parrish, with his vast financial undertakings, his
soaring political ambitions, his social aims which, robin realized
bitterly, had more than a little to do with his project for marrying
mary trevert, stricken down suddenly, without warning, in the very
heyday of success.
"why should he have done it?" he whispered to himself, "why, my god,
why?"
but the mask-like face at his feet, as he bent to scan it once more,
gave no answer to the riddle. determination, ambition, was portrayed on
the keen, eager face even in death.
with a little hopeless gesture the young barrister glanced round the
room. his eye fell upon the desk. he saw a neat array of letter-trays,
costly silver and tortoise-shell writing appointments, a couple of heavy
gold fountain pens, and an orderly collection of pencils. lying flat on
the great silver-edged blotter was a long brown envelope which had been
opened. propped up against the large crystal ink-well was a letter
addressed simply "miss mary trevert" in hartley parrish's big,
vigorous, and sprawling handwriting.
the letter to mary trevert, robin did not touch. but he picked up the
long brown envelope. on the back it bore a printed seal. the envelope
contained a document and a letter. at the sight of it the young man
started. it was hartley parrish's will. the letter was merely a covering
note from mr. bardy, of the firm of jerringham, bardy and company, a
well-known firm of solicitors, dated the previous evening. robin
replaced letter and document in their envelope without reading them.
"so that's it!" he murmured to himself. "suicide? but why?"
all the letter-trays save one were empty. in this was a little heap of
papers and letters. robin glanced through them. there were two or three
prospectuses, a notice of a golf match, a couple of notes from west end
tradesmen enclosing receipts and an acknowledgement from the bank. there
was only one personal letter--a business communication from a rotterdam
firm. robin glanced at the letter. it was typewritten on paper of a dark
slatey-blue shade. it was headed, "elias van der spyck & co., general
importers, rotterdam," and dealt with steel shipments.
robin dropped the letter back into the tray and turned to survey the
room. it was in perfect order. except for the still form lying on the
floor and the broken pane of glass in the window, there was nothing to
tell of the tragedy which had been enacted there that afternoon. there
were no papers to hint at a crisis save the prosaic-looking envelope
containing the will, and parrish's note for mary. the waste-paper
basket, a large and business-like affair in white wicker, had been
cleared.
robin walked across to the fireplace. the flames leapt eagerly about a
great oak log which hissed fitfully on top of the glowing coals
contained in the big iron fire-basket. the grate was bare and tidy. as
the young man looked at the fire, a little whirl of blue smoke whisked
out of the wide fireplace and eddied into the room. robin sniffed. the
room smelt smoky. now he remembered he had noticed it as he came in.
he stood an instant gazing thoughtfully at the blazing and leaping fire.
he threw a quick glance at the window where the curtains tossed fitfully
in the breeze coming through the broken pane. suddenly he stepped
quickly across the room and, lifting the reading-lamp from the table,
bore it over to the window which he scrutinized narrowly by its light.
then he dropped on one knee beside the dead body, placing the lamp on
the floor beside him.
he lifted the dead man's left hand and narrowly examined the nails.
without touching the right hand which clasped the revolver, he studied
its nails too. he rose and took the gold-mounted reading-glass from the
desk and scrutinized the nails of both hands through the glass.
then he rose to his feet again and, having replaced lamp and
reading-glass on the desk, stood there thoughtfully, his brown hands
clasped before him. his eyes wandered from the desk to the window and
from the window to the corpse. then he noticed on the carpet between the
dead body and the desk a little ball of slatey-blue paper. he bent down
and picked it up. he had begun to unroll it when the library door was
flung open. robin thrust the scrap of paper in his pocket and turned to
face the door.
chapter v
in which bude looks at robin greve
the library door opened. a large, square-built, florid man in the
braided uniform of a police inspector stood on the threshold of the
room. beside him was bude who, with an air of dignity and respectful
mourning suitably blended, waved him into the room.
"the--ahem!--body is in here, mr. humphries, sir!"
inspector humphries stepped quickly into the room. a little countryfied
in appearance and accent, he had the careful politeness, the measured
restraint, and the shrewd eye of the typical police officer. in thirty
years' service he had risen from village constable to be inspector of
county police. slow to anger, rather stolid, and with an excellent
heart, he had a vein of shrewd common sense not uncommonly found in that
fast disappearing species, the english peasant.
he nodded shortly to greve, and with a tread that shook the room strode
across to where hartley parrish was lying dead. in the meantime a
harassed-looking man with a short grey beard, wearing a shabby frock
coat, had slipped into the room behind the inspector. he approached
greve.
"dr. romain?" he queried, peering through his gold spectacles, "the
butler said ..."
"no, my name is greve," answered robin. "i am staying in the house. this
is dr. romain."
he motioned to the door. dr. romain came bustling into the room.
"glad to see you here so promptly, inspector," he said. "a shocking
business, very. is this the doctor? i am dr. romain ..."
dr. redstone bowed with alacrity.
"a great privilege, sir," he said staidly. "i have followed your work...."
but the other did not let him finish.
"shot through the heart ... instantaneous death ... severe haemorrhage ...
the pistol is there ... in his hand. a man with everything he wanted
in the world ... i can't understand it. 'pon my soul, i can't!"
the inspector, who had been kneeling by the corpse, motioned with his
head to the village doctor. dr. redstone went to him and began a cursory
examination of the body. the inspector rose.
"i understand from the butler, gentlemen," he said, "that it was miss
trevert, a lady staying in the house, who heard the shot fired. i should
like to see her, please. and you, sir, are you a relation of ..."
greve, thus addressed, hastily replied.
"only a friend, inspector. i am staying in the house. i am a barrister.
perhaps i may be able to assist you ..."
humphries shot a slow, shrewd glance at him from beneath his shaggy
blond eyebrows.
"thank you, sir, much obliged, i'm sure. now"--he thrust a hand into his
tunic and produced a large leather-bound notebook--"do you know anything
as would throw a light on this business?"
greve shook his head.
"he seemed perfectly cheerful at lunch. he left the dining-room directly
after he had taken his coffee."
"where did he go?"
"he came here to work. he told us at lunch that he was going to shut
himself up in the library for the whole afternoon as he had a lot of
work to get through."
the inspector made a note or two in his book. then he paused
thoughtfully tapping the end of his pencil against his teeth.
"it was miss trevert, you say, who found the body?"
"no," greve replied. "her brother, sir horace trevert. it was miss
trevert who heard the shot fired."
"the door was locked, i think?"
"on the inside. but here is sir horace trevert. he will tell you how he
got through the window and discovered the body."
horace trevert gave a brief account of his entry into the library. again
the inspector scribbled in his notebook.
"one or two more questions, gentlemen, please," he said, "and then i
should wish to see miss trevert. firstly, who saw mr. hartley parrish
last: and at what time?"
horace trevert looked at greve.
"it would be when he left us after lunch, wouldn't it?" he said.
"certainly, certainly," dr. romain broke in. "he left us all together in
the dining-room, you, horace and robin and lady margaret and mary ...
miss trevert and her mother, you know," he added by way of explanation
to the inspector.
"and he went straight to the library?"
"straight away, mr. humphries, sir," broke in bude. "mr. parrish crossed
me in the hall and gave me particular instructions that he was not to be
disturbed."
"that was at what time?"
"about two-thirty, sir."
"then you were the last person to see him before ..."
"why, no ... that is, unless ..."
the butler hesitated, casting a quick glance round his audience.
"what do you mean?" rapped out the inspector, looking up from his
notebook. "did anybody else see mr. parrish in spite of his orders?"
bude was silent. he was looking at greve.
"come on," said humphries sternly. "you heard my question? what makes
you think anybody else had access to mr. parrish before the shot was
heard?"
bude made a little resigned gesture of the hands.
"well, sir, i thought ... i made sure that mr. greve ..."
there was a moment's tense silence.
"well?" snapped humphries.
"i was going to say i made certain that mr. greve was going to mr.
parrish in the library to tell him tea was ready. mr. greve passed me in
the hall and went down the library corridor just after i had served the
tea."
all eyes turned to robin.
"it's perfectly true," he said. "i went out into the gardens for a
mouthful of fresh air just before tea. i left the house by the side door
off the corridor here. i didn't go to the library, though. it is an
understood thing in this house that no one ever disturbs mr. parrish
when he ..."
he broke off sharply.
"my god, mary," he cried, "you mustn't come in here!"
all turned round at his loud exclamation. mary trevert stood in the
doorway. dr. romain darted forward.
"my dear," he said soothingly, "you mustn't be here ..."
passively she let him lead her into the corridor. the inspector
continued his examination.
"at what time did you come along this corridor, sir?" he asked robin.
"it was not long after the tea gong went," answered robin, "about ten
minutes past five, i should say ..."
"and you heard nothing?"
robin shook his head.
"absolutely nothing," he replied. "the corridor was perfectly quiet. i
stepped out into the grounds, went for a turn round the house, but it
was raining, so i came in almost at once."
"at what time was that?"
"when i came in ... oh, about two or three minutes later, say about a
quarter past five."
humphries turned to horace trevert.
"what time was it when miss trevert heard the shot?"
horace puckered up his brow.
"well," he said, "i don't quite know. we were having tea. it wasn't much
after five--i should say about a quarter past."
"then the shot that miss trevert heard would have been fired just about
the time that you, sir," he turned to robin, "were coming in from your
stroll."
"somewhere about that time, i should say!" robin answered rather
thoughtfully.
"did you hear it?" queried the inspector.
"no," said robin.
"but surely you must have been at or near the side door at the time as
you were coming in ..."
"i came in by the front door," said robin, "on the other side of the
house ..."
very carefully the inspector closed his notebook, thrust the pencil back
in its place along the back, fastened the elastic about the book, and
turned to horace trevert.
"and now, sir, if i might speak to miss trevert alone for a minute ..."
"i say, though," expostulated horace, "my sister's awfully upset, you
know. is it absolutely necessary?"
"aye, sir, it is!" said the inspector. "but there's no need for me to
see her in here. perhaps in some other room ..."
"the drawing-room is next to this," the butler put in; "they'd be nice
and quiet in there, sir horace."
the inspector acquiesced. dr. redstone drew him aside for a whispered
colloquy.
the inspector came back to robin and horace.
"the doctor would like to have the body taken upstairs to mr. parrish's
room," he said. "he wishes to make a more detailed examination if dr.
romain would help him. if one of you gentlemen could give orders about
this ... i have two officers outside who would lend a hand. and this
room must then be shut and locked. sergeant harris!" he called.
"sir!"
a stout sergeant appeared at the library door.
"as soon as the body has been removed, you will lock the room and bring
the key to me. and you will return here and see that no one attempts to
get into the room. understand?"
"yessir!"
"inspector!"
robin greve called inspector humphries as the latter was preparing to
follow bude to the drawing-room.
"mr. parrish seems to have written a note for miss trevert," he said,
pointing at the desk. "and in that envelope you will find mr. parrish's
will. i discovered it there on the desk just before you arrived!"
again the inspector shot one of his swift glances at the young man. he
went over to the desk, shook the document and letter from their
envelope, glanced at them, and replaced them.
"i don't rightly know that this concerns me, gentlemen," he said slowly.
"i think i'll just take charge of it. and i'll give miss trevert her
letter."
taking the two envelopes, he tramped heavily out of the room.
then in a little while bude and jay and two bucolic-looking policemen
came to the library to move the body of the master of harkings. robin
stood by and watched the little procession pass slowly with silent feet
across the soft pile carpet and out into the corridor. but his thoughts
were not with parrish. he was haunted by the look which mary trevert had
given him as she had stood for an instant at the library door, a look of
fear, of suspicion. and it made his heart ache.
chapter vi
the letter
the great drawing-room of harkings was ablaze with light. the cluster of
lights in the heavy crystal chandelier and the green-shaded electric
lamps in their gilt sconces on the plain white-panelled walls coldly lit
up the formal, little-used room with its gilt furniture, painted piano,
and huge marble fireplace.
this glittering louis seize environment seemed altogether too much for
the homely inspector. whilst waiting for mary trevert to come to him, he
tried several attitudes in turn. the empty hearth frightened him away
from the mantelpiece, the fragile appearance of a gilt settee decided
him against risking his sixteen stone weight on its silken cushions, and
the vastness of the room overawed him when he took up his position in
the centre of the aubusson carpet. finally he selected an ornate chair,
rather more solid-looking than the rest, which he drew up to a small
table on the far side of the room. there he sat down, his large red
hands spread out upon his knees in an attitude of singular
embarrassment.
but mary trevert set him quickly at his ease when presently she came to
him. she was pale, but quite self-possessed. indeed, the effort she had
made to regain her self-control was so marked that it would have
scarcely escaped the attention of the inspector, even if he had not had
a brief vision of her as she had stood for that instant at the library
door, pale, distraught, and trembling. he was astonished to find her
cool, collected, almost business-like in the way she sat down, motioned
him to his seat, and expressed her readiness to tell him all she knew.
the phrases he had been laboriously preparing--"this has been a bad
shock for you, ma'am"; "you will forgive me, i'm sure, ma'am, for
calling upon you at a moment such as this"--died away on his lips as
mary trevert said:
"ask me any questions you wish, inspector. i will tell you everything i
can."
"that's very good of you, ma'am, i'm sure," answered the inspector,
unstrapping his notebook, "and i'll try and not detain you long. now,
then, tell me what you know of this sad affair ..."
mary trevert plucked an instant nervously at her little cambric
handerchief in her lap. then she said:
"i went to the library from the billiard-room ..."
"a moment," interposed the inspector. "what time was that?"
"a little after five. the tea gong had gone some time. i was going to
the library to tell mr. parrish that tea was ready ..."
mr. humphries made a note. he nodded to show he was listening.
"i crossed the hall and went down the library corridor. i knocked on the
library door. there was no reply. then i heard a shot and a sort of
thud."
despite her effort to remain calm, the girl's voice shook a little. she
made a little helpless gesture of her hands. a diamond ring she was
wearing on her finger caught the light and blazed for an instant.
"then i got frightened. i ran back along the corridor to the lounge
where the others were and told them."
"when you knocked at the door, you say there was no reply. i suppose,
now, you tried the handle first."
"oh, yes ..."
"then mr. parrish would have heard the two sounds? the turning of the
handle and then the knocking on the door? that's so, isn't it?"
"yes, i suppose so ..."
"yet you say there was no reply?"
"no. none at all."
the inspector jotted a word or two in his notebook as it lay open flat
upon the table.
"the shot, then, was fired immediately after you had knocked? not while
you were knocking?"
"no. i knocked and waited, expecting mr. parrish to answer. instead of
him answering, there came this shot ..."
"i see. and after the shot was fired there was a crash?"
"a sort of thud--like something heavy falling down."
"and you heard no groan or cry?"
the girl knit her brows for a moment.
"i ... i ... was frightened by the shot. i ... i ... don't seem able to
remember what happened afterwards. let me think ... let me think ..."
"there, there," said the inspector paternally, "don't upset yourself
like this. just try and think what happened after you heard the shot
fired ..."
mary trevert shuddered, one slim white hand pressed against her cheek.
"i do remember now," she said, "there _was_ a cry. it was more like a
sharp exclamation ..."
"and then you heard this crash?"
"yes ..."
the girl had somewhat regained her self-possession. she dabbed her eyes
with her handkerchief quickly as though ashamed of her weakness.
"now," said humphries, clearing his throat, as though to indicate that
the conversation had changed, "you and lady margaret trevert knew mr.
parrish pretty well, i believe, miss trevert. have you any idea why he
should have done this thing?"
mary trevert shook her dark head rather wearily.
"it is inconceivable to me ... to all of us," she answered.
"do you happen to know whether mr. parrish had any business worries?"
"he always had a great deal of business on hand and he has had a great
deal to do lately over some big deal."
"what was it, do you know?"
"he was raising fresh capital for hornaway's--that is the big
engineering firm he controls ..."
"do you know if he was pleased with the way things were shaping?"
"oh, yes. he told me last night that everything would be finished this
week. he seemed quite satisfied."
the inspector paused to make a note.
then he thrust a hand into the side-pocket of his tunic and produced
hartley parrish's letter.
"this," he said, eyeing the girl as he handed her the letter, "may throw
some light on the affair!"
open-eyed, a little surprised, she took the plain white envelope from
his hand and gazed an instant without speaking, on the bold sprawling
address--
_"miss mary trevert."_
"open it, please," said the inspector gently.
the girl tore open the envelope. humphries saw her eyes fill, watched
the emotion grip her and shake her in her self-control so that she could
not speak when, her reading done, she gave him back the letter.
without asking her permission, he took the sheet of fine, expensive
paper with its neat engraved heading and postal directions, and read
hartley parrish's last message.
my dear [it ran], i signed my will at bardy's office
yesterday, and he sent it back to me to-day. just
this line to let you know you are properly provided
for should anything happen to me. i wanted to fix
things so that you and lady margaret would not
have to worry any more. i just had to _write_.
i guess you understand why.
h.
there was a long and impressive silence while the inspector
deliberately read the note. then he looked interrogatively at the girl.
"we were engaged, inspector," she said. "we were to have been married
very soon."
a deep flush crept slowly over mr. humphries's florid face and spread
into the roots of his tawny fair hair.
"but what does he mean by 'having to write'?" he asked.
the girl replied hastily, her eyes on the ground.
"mr. parrish was under the impression that ... that ... without his
money i should not have cared for him. that is what he means ..."
"you knew he had provided for you in his will?"
"he told me several times that he intended to leave me everything. you
see, he has no relatives!"
"i see!" said the inspector in a reflective voice.
"had he any enemies, do you know? anybody who would drive him to a thing
like this?"
the girl shook her head vehemently.
"no!"
the monosyllable came out emphatically. again the inspector darted one
of his quick, shrewd glances at the girl. she met his scrutiny with her
habitual serene and candid gaze. the inspector dropped his eyes and
scribbled in his book.
"was his health good?"
"he smoked far too much," the girl said, "and it made him rather nervy.
but otherwise he never had a day's illness in his life."
humphries ran his eye over the notes he had made.
"there is just one more question i should like to ask you, miss
trevert," he said, "rather a personal question."
mary trevert's hands twisted the cambric handkerchief into a little ball
and slowly unwound it again. but her face remained quite calm.
"about your engagement to mr. parrish ... when did it take place?"
"some days ago. it has not yet been announced."
the inspector coughed.
"i was only wondering whether, perhaps, mr. parrish was not quite ...
whether he was, maybe, a little disturbed in his mind about the
engagement ..."
the girl hesitated. then she said firmly:
"mr. parrish was perfectly happy about it. he was looking forward to our
being married in the spring."
mr. humphries shut his notebook with a snap and rose to his feet.
"thank you very much, ma'am," he said with a little formal bow. "if you
will excuse me now. i have the doctor to see again and there's the
coroner to be warned ..."
he bowed again and tramped towards the door with a tread that made the
chandelier tinkle melodiously.
the door closed behind him and his heavy footsteps died away along the
corridor. mary trevert had risen to her feet calm and impassive. but
when he had gone, her bosom began to heave and a spasm of pain shot
across her face. again the tears welled up in her eyes, brimmed over and
stole down her cheeks.
"if i only _knew!_" she sobbed, "if i only _knew!_"
chapter vii
voices in the library
the swift tragedy of the winter afternoon had convulsed the
well-organized repose of hartley parrish's household. nowhere had his
master grasp of detail been seen to better advantage than in the
management of his country home. overwhelmed with work though he
constantly was, accustomed to carry his business and often part of his
business staff to harkings with him for the week-ends, there was never
the least confusion about the house. the methodical calm of harkings was
that of a convent.
hartley parrish was wont to say that he paid his butler and housekeeper
well to save himself from worry. it was rather to ensure his orders
being punctiliously and promptly carried out. his was the mind behind
the method which ensured that meals were punctually served and trains at
stevenish station never missed.
but it was into a house in turmoil that mary trevert stepped when she
left the drawing-room and passed along the corridor to go to her room.
doors slammed and there was the heavy thud of footsteps on the floor
above. the glass door leading into the gardens was open, as mary passed
it, swinging in the gusts of cold rain. in the gardens without there was
a confused murmur of voices and the flash of lanterns.
in the hall a knot of servants were gossiping in frightened whispers
with a couple of large, rather bovine country constables who,
bareheaded, without their helmets, which they held under their arms,
looked curiously undressed.
the whispers died away as mary crossed the hall. all eyes followed her
with interest as she went. it was as though an echo of her talk with the
inspector had by some occult means already spread through the little
household. through the half-open green baize door leading to the
servants' quarters some unseen person was bawling down the telephone in
a heated controversy with the exchange about a long-distance call to
london. and but an hour since, the girl reflected sadly, as she mounted
the oaken staircase, the house had been wrapt in its wonted evening
silence in response to that firm and dominating personality who had
passed out in the gloom of the winter twilight.
when, about six months before, mary and her mother had begun to be
regular visitors at harkings, hartley parrish had insisted on giving
mary a boudoir to herself. this, in response to a chance remark of
mary's in admiration of a chinese room she had seen at a friend's house,
parrish had had decorated in the chinese style with black walls and
black-and-gold lacquer furniture. the room had been transformed from a
rather prosaic morning-room with old oak and chintz in the space of
three days as a surprise for mary. she remembered now how parrish had
left her to make the discovery of the change for herself. she loved
colour and line, and the contrast between this quaint and delightful
room with her rather shabby bedroom in her mother's small house in
brompton had made this surprise one of the most delightful she had ever
experienced.
she rang the bell and sat down listlessly in a charmingly lacquered
louis seize armchair in front of the log-fire blazing brightly in the
fireplace. she was conscious that a great disaster had overtaken her,
but only dimly conscious. for more poignantly than this dull sense of
tragedy she was aware of a great aching at her heart, and her thoughts,
after hovering over the events of the afternoon, settled down upon her
talk that afternoon ... already how far off it seemed ... with robin
greve in the library.
robin had always been her hero. she could see him now in the glow of the
fire as he had been when in the holidays he had come and snatched her
away from a home already drab and difficult for a matinee and an orgy of
cream cakes at gunter's afterwards. he was then a long, slim, handsome
boy of irrepressible spirits and impulsive generosity which usually left
him, after the first few days of his holidays, in a state of lamentable
impecuniosity. all their lives, it seemed to her, they had been friends,
but with no stronger feeling between them until robin, having joined the
army on the outbreak of war, had come to say good-bye on being ordered
to france.
but by that time money troubles at home with which, as it seemed to her,
she had been surrounded all her life, had grown so pressing that, apart
from lady margaret's reiterated counsels, she herself had come to
recognize that a suitable marriage was the only way out of their
ever-increasing embarrassment.
she and robin, she recalled with a feeling of relief, had never
discussed the matter. he, too, had understood and had sailed for france
without seeking to take advantage of the circumstance.
outside in the black night a car throbbed. footsteps crunched the gravel
beneath her window. the sounds brought her back to the present with a
sudden pang. she began to think of hartley parrish. all her life she
had been so very poor that, until she had met this big, vigorous,
intensely vital man, she had never known what a lavish command of money
meant. hartley parrish did things in a big way. if he wanted a thing he
bought it, as he had bought bude, as he had bought a car he had seen
standing outside a pall mall club and admired. he had rooted the owner
out, bade him name his price, and had paid it, there and then, by
cheque, and driven mary off to a lawn tennis tournament at queen's,
hugely delighted by her bewilderment.
she did not love him. she could never have learnt to love him. there was
a gleeful zest in his enjoyment of his money, an ostentatious parade of
his riches which repelled her. and there was a look in his face, those
narrow eyes, that hard mouth, which revealed to her womanly intuition a
ruthlessness which she guessed he kept for his business. but she liked
him, especially his reverent and chivalrous devotion to her, and the
thought that his dominating and vital personality was extinguished for
ever made her conscious of a great void in her life.
and now she was rich. hartley parrish's idea of "proper provision" for
her, she knew, meant wealth for her beyond anything she had ever
dreamed. the perpetual debasing struggle with poverty which she and her
mother had carried on for years was a thing of the past. money meant
freedom, freedom to live ... and to love.
she stretched her hands out to the blaze. was she free to love? what had
driven hartley parrish to suicide? or who? she went over in her mind her
interview with robin greve in the billiard-room. he had spoken of other
women in connection with hartley parrish. had he used that knowledge to
threaten his rival? what had robin done after he had left her that
afternoon with his final taunt?
she felt the blood rise to her cheeks as she thought of it. mary trevert
had all the pride of her ancient race. the recollection of that taunt
galled her. her loyalty to the man from whom she had received nothing
but chivalry, whose fortune was to banish a hideous nightmare from her
life, rose up in arms. what had robin done? she must know the truth ...
a tap came at the door. bude appeared.
"i think you rang, miss," he said in his quiet, deep voice. "i was with
the inspector, miss, and i couldn't come before. was there anything?..."
the girl turned in her chair.
"come in and shut the door, bude," she said. "i want to speak to you."
the butler obeyed and came over to where she sat. he seemed ill at ease
and rather apprehensive.
"bude," said the girl, "i want you to tell me why you were certain that
mr. greve was going to mr. parrish in the library when he passed you in
the hall this afternoon!"
the butler smoothed his hands down his trousers in embarrassment.
"i thought he ... mr. greve ... would be sure to be going to fetch mr.
parrish in to tea, miss ..." he replied, eyeing the girl anxiously.
mary trevert continued gazing into the fire.
"you know it is a rule in this house, bude," she said, "that mr. parrish
is never disturbed in the library ..."
the butler changed his position uneasily.
"yes, miss, but i thought ..."
slowly mary trevert turned and looked at the man.
"bude,"--her voice was very calm,--"i want you to tell me the truth. you
know that mr. greve went in to mr. parrish ..."
bude looked uneasily about him.
"oh, miss," he answered, almost in a whisper, "whatever are you saying?"
"i want your answer, bude," the girl said coldly.
bude did not speak. he rubbed his hands up and down his trousers in
desperation.
"i wish to know why mr. parrish did this thing, bude. i mean to know.
and i think you are keeping something back!"
the challenge resounded clearly, firmly.
"miss trevert, ma'am," the butler said in a low voice, "i wouldn't take
it upon me to say anything as would get anybody in this house into
trouble...."
"you saw mr. greve go into mr. parrish?"
the butler raised his hands in a quick gesture of denial.
"god forbid, miss!" he ejaculated in horror.
"what, then, do you know that is likely to get anybody here into
trouble?"
the butler hesitated an instant. then he spoke.
"that inspector humphries has been asking me questions, miss, in a
nasty, suspicious sort o' way. i told him, what i told him already, that
just after i'd done serving the tea mr. greve crossed the hall and went
down the library corridor...."
"you didn't tell him everything, bude?"
the butler took a step nearer.
"oh, miss," he said, lowering his voice, "if you'll pardon my frankness,
but i know as how you and mr. greve are old friends, and i wouldn't
take it upon me to tell the police anything as might ..."
mary trevert stood up and faced the man.
"bude," said she, "mr. parrish was your master, a kind and generous
master as he was kind and generous to every one in this house. we must
clear up the mystery of his ... of his death. neither you nor i nor mr.
greve nor anybody must stand in the way. now, tell me the truth!"
she dropped back into her chair. she gave the order imperiously like the
mistress of the house. the butler, trained through life to receive
orders, surrendered.
"there's nothing much to tell, miss. when mr. humphries asked me if i
were the last person to see mr. parrish alive, i made sure that mr.
greve would say he had been in to tell him tea was ready. but mr. greve,
who heard the inspector's question and my answer, said nothing. so i
thought, maybe, he had his reasons and i did not feel exactly as how it
was my place ..."
mary trevert tapped with her foot impatiently.
"but what grounds have you for saying that mr. greve went in to mr.
parrish? mr. greve declared quite positively that he went out by the
side door and did not go into the library at all."
"but, miss, i heard him speaking to mr. parrish ..."
the girl turned round and the man saw fear in her wide-open eyes.
the butler put his hand on the back of her chair and leaned forward.
"better leave things where they are, miss," he said in a low voice. "mr.
parrish, i dare say, had his reasons. he's gone to his last account now.
what does it matter why he done it ..."
the man was agitated, and in his emotion his carefully studied english
was forsaking him.
but the girl broke in incisively.
"please explain what you mean!" she commanded.
"why, miss," replied the butler, "we know that mr. greve had no call to
like mr. parrish seeing how things were between you and the master ..."
"you mean the servants know that mr. parrish and i were engaged ..."
bude made a deprecatory gesture.
"know, miss? i wouldn't go so far as to say 'know.' but there has been
some talk in the servants' 'all, miss. you know what young female
servants are, miss ..."
"and you think that mr. greve went to mr. parrish to talk about ... me?"
mary trevert's voice faltered a little. she looked eagerly at the
other's fat, smooth face.
"i presoomed as much, miss, i must confess!"
"but what did you hear mr. greve say?"
"i heard nothing, miss, except just only the sound of voices. after mr.
greve had crossed me in the hall, i took the salver i was carrying into
the butler's pantry. i stayed there a minute or two, and then i
remembered i had not collected the letters from the box in the hall for
the chauffeur to take to the post, the same as he does every evening. i
went back to the hall, and just as i opened the green baize door i heard
voices from the library ..."
"was it mr. greve's voice?"
"i cannot say, miss. it was just the sound of voices, rather loud-like.
i caught the sound because the door leading from the hall to the library
corridor was ajar. mr. greve must have forgotten to shut it."
"what did you do?"
"well, miss, i closed the corridor door ..."
"why did you do that?"
"well, miss, seeing the voices sounded angry-like, i thought perhaps it
would be better not to let any one else hear.... and mr. greve looked
upset-like when he passed me. he gave me quite a turn, he did, when i
saw his face under the hall lamp...."
"did you stay there ... and listen?"
bude drew himself up.
"that is not my 'abit, miss, not 'ere nor in hany of the 'ouses where i
'ave seen service...."
the butler broke off. the _h_'s were too much for him in his
indignation.
"i didn't mean to suggest anything underhand," the girl said quickly. "i
mean, did you hear any more?"
"no, miss. i emptied the letter-box and took the letters to the
servants' hall."
"but," said mary in a puzzled way, "why do you say it was mr. greve if
you didn't hear his voice?"
bude spread out his hands in bewilderment.
"who else should it have been, miss? sir horace and the doctor were in
the lounge at tea. jay and robert were in the servants' hall. it could
have been nobody else...."
the girl's head sank slowly on her breast. she was silent. the butler
shifted his position.
"was there anything more, miss?" he asked after a little while.
"there is nothing further, thank you, bude," replied mary. "about mr.
greve, i am sure there must be some mistake. he cannot have understood
mr. humphries's question. i'll ask him about it when i see him. i don't
think i should say anything to the inspector about it, at any rate, not
until i've seen mr. greve. he'll probably speak to you about it
himself...."
bude made a motion as though he were going to say something. then
apparently he thought better of it, for he made a little formal bow and
in his usual slow and dignified manner made his exit from the room.
chapter viii
robin goes to mary
the house telephone, standing on the long and gracefully designed desk
with its elaborately lacquered top, whirred. mary started from her
reverie in her chair by the fire. by the clock on the mantelshelf she
saw that it was a quarter past eight. she remembered that once her
mother had knocked at her door and bidden her come down to dinner. she
had refused the invitation, declining to unlock the door.
she lifted the receiver.
"that you, mary?"
robin was speaking.
"may i come up and see you? or would you rather be left alone?"
his firm, pleasant voice greatly comforted her. only then she realized
how greatly she craved sympathy. but the recollection of bude's story
suddenly interposed itself like a barrier between them.
"yes, come up," she said, "i want to speak to you!"
her voice was dispirited,
"i don't want to see him," she told herself as she replaced the
receiver, got up, and unlocked the door, "but i must _know_!"
a gentle tap came at the door. robin came in quickly and crossed to
where she stood by the fire.
"my dear!" he said and put out his two hands.
her hands were behind her back, the fingers nervously intertwining. she
kept them there and made no sign that she had observed his gesture.
he looked at her in surprise.
"this has been terrible for you, mary," he said. "i wish to god i could
make you realize how very, very much i feel for you in what you must be
going through...."
the phrase was formal and he brought it out irresolutely, chilled as he
was by her reception. she was looking at him dispassionately, her
forehead a little puckered, her eyes a trifle hard.
"won't you sit down," she said. "there is something i wanted to say!"
he was looking at her now in a puzzled fashion. with rather feigned
deliberation he chose a chair and sat down facing the fire. a lamp on
the mantelpiece--the only light in the room--threw its rays on his face.
his chin was set rather more squarely than his wont and his eyes were
shining.
"mary,"--he leant forward towards her,--"please forget what i said this
afternoon. it was beastly of me, but i hardly knew what i was
doing...."
she made a little gesture as if to wave his apology aside. then, with
her hands clasped in front of her, scanning the nails, she asked, almost
casually:
"what did you say to hartley parrish in the library this afternoon?"
robin stared at her in amazement.
"but i was not in the library!" he answered.
the girl dropped her hands sharply to her side.
"don't quibble with me, robin," she said. "what did you say to hartley
parrish after you left me this afternoon in the billiard-room?"
he was still staring at her, but now there was a deep furrow between his
brows. he was breathing rather hard.
"i did not speak to parrish at all after i left you."
his answer was curt and incisive.
"do you mean to tell me," mary said, "that, after you left me and went
down the corridor towards the library, you neither went in to hartley
nor spoke to him!"
"i do!"
"then how do you account for the fact that, almost immediately after you
had crossed bude in the hall, he heard the sound of voices in the
library?"
robin greve stood up abruptly.
"bude, you say, makes this statement?"
"certainly!"
"to whom, may i ask?"
he spoke sharply and there was a challenging ring in his voice. it
nettled the girl.
"only to me," she said quickly, and added: "you needn't think he has
told the police!"
very deliberately robin plucked his handkerchief from his sleeve, wiped
his lips, and replaced it. the girl saw that his hands were trembling.
"why do you say that to me?" he demanded rather fiercely.
mary trevert shrugged her shoulders.
"this afternoon," she said, "when i told you of my engagement to
hartley, you began by abusing him to me, you rushed from the room making
straight for the library where we all know that hartley was working, and
a few minutes after bude hears voices raised in anger proceeding from
there. the next thing we know is that hartley has ..."
she broke off and looked away.
"mary,"--robin's voice was grave, and he had mastered all signs of
irritation,--"you and i have known one another all our lives. you ought
to know me well enough by now to understand that i don't tell you lies.
when i say i haven't seen or spoken to hartley parrish since lunch this
afternoon, that is the truth!"
"how can it be the truth?" the girl insisted. "horace and dr. romain
were both in the lounge-hall, bude was in the hall, the other
menservants were in the servants' hall. you are the only man in the
house not accounted for, and a minute before bude heard these voices you
go down the corridor towards the library. i can understand you wanting
to keep it from the police, but why do you want to deceive _me_?"
"mary," answered the young man sternly, "i know you're upset, but that's
no justification for persisting in this stupid charge against me. i tell
you i never saw parrish or spoke to him, either, between lunch and when
i saw him lying dead in the library. i am not going to repeat the
denial. but you may as well understand now that i am not in the habit of
allowing my friends to doubt my word!"
mary flamed up at his tone.
"if you are my friend," she cried, "why can't you trust me? why should i
find this out from bude? why should i be humiliated by hearing from the
butler that he kept this evidence from the police in order to please me
because you and i are friends? i am only trying to help you, to shield
you ..."
"that will do, mary," he said. "no, you must hear what i have to say. if
you insist on disbelieving me, you must. but i don't want you to help
me. i don't want you to shield me. i shall make it my business to see
that bude's evidence is brought before the detective inspector from
scotland yard who is being brought down here to handle the case ..."
"a detective from scotland yard?" the girl repeated.
"yes, a detective. humphries is puzzled by several points about this
case and has asked for assistance from london. he is right. neither the
circumstances of parrish's death nor the motive of his act are clear.
bude's evidence is sufficient proof that somebody did gain access to the
library this afternoon. in that case...."
"yes...."
"in that case," said greve slowly, "it may not be suicide...."
mary put one hand suddenly to her face as women do when they are
frightened. she shrank back.
"you mean...."
he nodded.
"murder!"
the girl gave a little gasp. then she stretched out her hand and
touched his arm.
"but, robin," she spoke in quick gasps,--"you can't give the police this
evidence of bude's. don't you see it incriminates _you?_ don't you
realize that every scrap of evidence points to you as being the man that
visited mr. parrish in the library this afternoon? you're a lawyer,
robin. you understand these things. don't you see what i mean?"
he nodded curtly.
"perfectly," he replied coldly.
"bude will do what i tell him," the girl hurried on. "there is no need
for the police to know...."
"on the contrary," said the other imperturbably, "it is essential they
should be told at once."
the girl grasped the lapels of his coat in her two hands. her breath
came quickly and she trembled all over.
"are you mad, robin?" she cried. "who could have wanted to kill poor
hartley? why should you put these ideas into the heads of the police?
bude may have imagined everything. now, you'll be sensible, promise
me...."
very gently he detached the two slim hands that held his coat. his mouth
was set in a firm line.
"we are going to sift this thing to the bottom, mary," he said, "no
matter what are the consequences. you owe it to parrish and you owe it
to me...."
the telephone trilled suddenly.
robin picked up the receiver,
"yes, bude," he said.
there was a moment's silence in the room broken as the clock on the
mantelpiece chimed nine times. then robin said into the telephone:
"right! tell him i'll be down immediately!"
he put down the receiver and turned to mary.
"a detective inspector has arrived from london. he is asking to see me.
i must go downstairs."
mary, her elbows on the mantelpiece, was staring into the fire. at the
sound of his voice she swung round quickly.
"robin!" she cried.
but she spoke too late.
robin greve had left the room.
chapter ix
mr. manderton
a quality which had gone far to lay the foundations of the name which
robin greve was rapidly making at the bar was his strong intuitive
sense. he had the rare ability of correctly 'sensing' an atmosphere, an
uncanny _flair_ for driving instantly at the heart of a situation, which
rendered him in the courts a dexterous advocate and a redoubtable
opponent.
now, as he came into the lounge from the big oak staircase, he instantly
realized that he had entered an unfriendly atmosphere. the concealed
lights which were set all round the cornice of the room were turned on,
flooding the pleasantly snug room with soft reflected light. a little
group stood about the fire, bude, jay, hartley parrish's man, and a
stranger. jay was engaged in earnest conversation with the stranger. but
at the sound of greve's foot upon the staircase, the conversation ceased
and a silence fell on the group.
greve's attention was immediately attracted towards the stranger, whom
he surmised to be the detective from scotland yard. he was a big, burly
man with a heavy dark moustache, straight and rather thin black hair,
and coarse features. he looked a full-blooded, plethoric person with
reddish-blue veins on his florid face, and a heavy jowl which
over-feeding, robin surmised, had made fullish. he was very neatly
dressed in his black overcoat with velvet collar carefully brushed, his
natty black tie with its pearl pin, and well-polished boots. his black
bowler hat, with a pair of heavy dogskin gloves, neatly folded, lay on
the table.
"this mr. greve?"
bude and jay fell back as robin joined the group. the detective bent his
gaze on the young barrister as he put his question, and robin for the
first time noticed his eyes. keen and clear, they were ill-suited, he
thought, to the rather gross features of the man. by right he should
have had either the small and roguish or the pale and expressionless
eyes which are habitually found in individuals of the sanguine
temperament.
the detective had a trick of dropping his eyes to his boots. when he
raised them, the effect was to alter his whole expression. his eyes,
well-open, keenly observant, in perpetual motion, lent an air of
alertness, of shrewdness, to his heavy, florid countenance.
"that is my name," said robin, answering his question. "i am a
barrister. i have met some of your people at the yard, but i don't
think...."
"detective-inspector manderton," interjected the big man, and paused as
though to say, "let that sink in!"
robin knew him well by repute. his qualities were those of the bull-dog,
slow-moving, obstinately brave, and desperately tenacious. his was a
name to conjure with among the criminal classes, and his career was
starred with various sensational tussles with desperate criminals, for
detective-inspector manderton, when engaged on a case, invariably "took
a hand himself," as he phrased it, when an arrest was to be made. a
bullet-hole in his right thigh and an imperfectly knitted right
collar-bone remained to remind him of this propensity of his. his motto,
as he was fond of saying, was, "what i have i hold!"
"well, mr. greve," said the detective in a loud, hectoring voice,
"perhaps you will be good enough to tell me what you know of this
affair?"
robin flushed angrily at the man's manner. but there was no trace of
resentment in his voice as he replied. he told manderton what he had
already told humphries: how he had gone from the billiard-room across
the hall and down the library corridor to the side-door into the
grounds, intending to have a stroll before tea, but, finding that it
was threatening rain, had returned to the house by the front door.
the detective scanned the young man's face closely as he spoke. when
robin had finished, the other dropped his eyes and seemed to be
examining the brilliant polish of his boots. he said nothing, and again
robin became aware of the atmosphere of hostility towards him which this
man radiated.
"it is dark at five o'clock?"
manderton turned to bude.
"getting on that way, sir," the butler agreed.
"are you in the habit, sir,"--the detective turned to robin now,--"of
going out for walks in the dark?"
greve shrugged his shoulders.
"i had been sitting in the billiard-room. it was rather stuffy, so i
thought i'd like some air before tea!"
"you left miss trevert in the billiard-room?"
"yes!"
"why?"
greve put a hand to his throat and eased his collar.
"the gong had sounded for tea," the detective went on imperturbably;
"surely it would have been more natural for you to have brought miss
trevert with you?"
"i didn't wish to!"
mr. manderton cleared his throat.
"ah!" he grunted. "you didn't wish to. i should like you to be frank
with me, mr. greve, please. was it not a fact that you and miss trevert
had words?"
he looked up sharply at him with contracted pupils.
"you took a certain interest in this young lady?"
"mr. manderton,"--robin spoke with a certain _hauteur_,--"don't you
think we might leave miss trevert's name out of this?"
"mr. greve," replied the detective bluntly, "i don't!"
robin made a little gesture of resignation.
"before the servants...."
"come, come, sir," the detective broke in, "with all respect to the
young lady and yourself, it was a matter of common knowledge in the
house that she and you were ... well, old friends. it was remarked, mr.
greve, i may remind you, that you looked very upset-like when you left
the billiard-room to"--he paused perceptibly--"to go for your stroll in
the dark."
robin glanced quickly round the group. jay averted his eyes. as for
bude, he was the picture of embarrassment.
"you seem to be singularly well posted in the gossip of the servants'
hall, mr. manderton!" said robin hotly.
it was a foolish remark, and robin regretted it the moment the words had
left his mouth.
"well, yes," commented the detective slowly, "i am. i shall be well
posted on the whole of this case, presently, i hope, sir!"
his manner was perfectly respectful, but reserved almost to a tone of
menace.
"in that case," said robin, "i'll tell you something you don't know, mr.
manderton. has bude told you what he heard after i had passed him in the
hall?"
interest flashed at once into the detective's face. he turned quickly to
the butler. robin felt he had scored.
"what did you hear?" he said sharply.
bude looked round wildly. his large, fish-like mouth twitched, and he
made a few feeble gestures with his hands.
"it was only perhaps an idea of mine, sir," he stammered,--"just a sort
of idea ... i dare say i was mistaken. my hearing ain't what it was,
sir...."
"don't you try to hoodwink me," said manderton, with sudden ferocity,
knitting his brows and frowning at the unfortunate butler. "come on and
tell us what you heard. mr. greve knows and i mean to. out with it!"
bude cast a reproachful glance at robin. then he said:
"well, sir, a minute or two after mr. greve had passed me, i went back
to the hall and through the open door of the corridor leading to the
library, i heard voices!"
"voices, eh? did you recognize them?"
"no, sir. it was just the sound of talking!"
"you told miss trevert they were loud voices, bude!" robin interrupted.
"yes, sir," replied the butler, "they were loudish in a manner o'
speaking, else i shouldn't have heard them!"
"why not?"
the detective rapped the question out sharply.
"why, because the library door was locked, sir!"
"how do you know that?"
"because miss trevert and dr. romain both tried the handle and couldn't
get in!"
"ah!" said manderton, "you mean the door was locked _when the body was
found!_ now, as to these voices. were they men's voices?"
"yes, sir, i should say so."
"why?"
"because they were deep-like!"
"was mr. hartley parrish's voice one of them?"
the butler spread out his hands.
"that i couldn't say! i just heard the murmur-like, then shut the
passage door quickly ..."
"why?"
"well, sir, i thought ... i didn't want to listen...."
"you thought one of the voices was mr. greve's, eh? having a row with
mr. parrish, eh? about the lady, isn't that right?"
"aren't you going rather too fast?" said robin quietly.
but the detective ignored him.
"come on and answer my question, my man," he said harshly. "didn't you
think it was mr. hartley parrish and mr. greve here having a bit of a
dust-up about the young lady being engaged to mr. parrish?"
"well, perhaps i did, but...."
like a flash the detective turned on robin.
"what do you know about this?" he demanded fiercely.
"nothing," said greve. "as i have told you already, i did not see mr.
parrish alive again after lunch, nor did i speak to him. what i would
suggest to you now is that upon this evidence of bude's depends the
vitally important question of how mr. parrish met his death. though he
was found with a revolver in his hand, none of us in this house know of
any good motive for his suicide. i put it to you that the man who can
furnish us with this motive is the owner of the voice heard by bude in
conversation with mr. parrish, since obviously nobody other than mr.
parrish and possibly this unknown person was in the library block at the
time. and i would further remark, mr. manderton, that, until the bullet
has been extracted, we do not know that mr. parrish killed
_himself_..."
"no," said the detective significantly, "we don't!"
he had dropped his eyes to the ground now and was studying the pattern
of the hearth-rug.
"you say you heard no shot?" he suddenly asked robin.
"no!"
"no one other than miss trevert, i gather, heard the shot?"
"that is so!"
mr. manderton consulted a slip of paper which he drew from his pocket.
"inspector humphries," he said, "has drawn up a rough time-table of
events leading up to mr. parrish's death, based on the evidence he has
taken here this evening. you will tell me if it tallies."
he read from the slip:
5 p.m. bude sounds the gong for tea.
5.10   mr. greve passes bude in the hall and goes
down the corridor leading to the library.
mr. greve states he went straight out by
the side door into the gardens.
the detective looked up from his reading.
"at 5.12, let us say, bude comes back from the servants' quarters to the
hall and hears voices from the library. he closes the passage door. is
that right?"
bude nodded.
"it would be about two minutes after i saw mr. greve the first time," he
agreed.
"very well!"
the detective resumed his reading.
5.15 p.m. miss trevert goes to fetch mr. parrish
in to tea. she finds the library door
locked. tries the handle and hears a
shot.
5.18 (say) miss trevert comes into the lounge hall
and gives the alarm.
"now, sir," said mr. manderton briskly, "i should like to ask you one or
two further questions. firstly, how long were you out on your stroll in
the dark?"
"i should think about two or three minutes."
"that is to say, if you left the house by the side door at 5.10, you
were back in the house by 5.13."
"yes, that would be right," robin agreed.
"and what did you do when you came in?"
"i went up to my room to fetch a letter for the post."
"miss trevert heard the shot fired at 5.15. where were you at that
time?"
"in my bedroom, i should say. i was there for a few minutes as i had to
write a cheque...."
"and where is your bedroom?"
"in the other wing above the billiard-room."
"hm! a pistol shot makes a great deal of noise. it seems strange that
nobody in the house should have heard it."
here bude interposed.
"mr. parrish, sir, was very particular about noise. he had the library
door and the door leading from the front hall to the library corridor
specially felted so that he should not hear any sounds from the house
when he was working in the library. that library wing was absolutely
shut off from the rest of the house. it was always uncommon quiet...."
but the detective, ignoring him, turned to robin again.
"i have been round the house," he said. "it does not seem to me it
ought to take you three or even two minutes to walk from the side door
to the front door. i should say it would be a matter of about thirty
seconds!"
"excuse me," robin answered quickly, "i didn't say i went straight from
the side to the front door. i went through the gardens following the
path that leads to the main drive. there i turned and came back to the
front door."
"and you assert that you heard nothing?"
"i heard nothing."
"neither the 'loud voices' which the butler heard within two minutes of
your leaving the house nor the shot fired five minutes later?"
"i heard nothing."
mr. manderton examined the toes of his boots carefully.
"you heard nothing!" he repeated.
the door opened suddenly and dr. romain appeared. with him was the
village practitioner and inspector humphries.
dr. redstone carried in his hand a little pad of cotton wool. he bore it
over to the fireplace and unwrapping the lint showed a twisted fragment
of lead lying on the bloodstained dressing.
"straight through the heart and lodged in the spine," he said. "death
was absolutely instantaneous."
the detective picked up the bullet and scrutinized it closely.
"browning pistol ammunition," observed humphries; "it fits the gun he
used. there's half a dozen spare rounds in one of the drawers of his
dressing-room upstairs."
mr. manderton drew inspector humphries and dr. redstone into a corner of
the room where they conversed in undertones. bude and jay had vanished.
dr. romain turned to robin greve, who stood lost in a reverie, staring
into the fire.
"a clear case of suicide," he said. "the medical evidence is conclusive
on that point. a most amazing affair. i can't conceive what drove him to
it. why _did_ he do it?"
"ah! why?" said robin.
chapter x
a smoking chimney
a red sun glowed dully through a thin mist when, on the following
morning, robin greve emerged from the side door into the gardens of
harkings. it was a still, mild day. moisture from the night's rain yet
hung translucent on the black limbs of the bare trees and glistened like
diamonds on the closely cropped turf of the lawn. in the air was a
pleasant smell of damp earth.
robin paused an instant outside the door in the library corridor and
inhaled the morning air greedily. he had spent a restless, fitful night.
his sleep had been haunted by the riddle which, since the previous
evening, had cast its shadow over the pleasant house. the mystery of
hartley parrish's death obsessed him. if it was suicide,--and the
doctors were both positive on the point--the motive eluded him utterly.
his mind, trained to logical processes of reasoning by his practice of
the law, baulked at the theory. when he thought of hartley parrish as he
had seen him at luncheon on the day before, striding with his quick,
vigorous step into the room, boyishly curious to know what the _chef_
was giving them to eat, devouring his lunch with obvious animal
enjoyment, brimful of energy, dominating the table with his forceful,
eager personality....
the sound of voices in the library broke in upon his thoughts. robin
raised his head and listened. some one appeared to be talking in a loud
voice ... no, not talking ... rather declaiming.
stepping quietly on the hard gravel path, robin turned the corner of the
house and came into view of the library window. the window-pane gaped,
shattered where horace trevert had broken the glass on the previous
evening when effecting an entrance into the room. framed in the ragged
outline of the splintered glass, bulked the large form of sergeant
harris. he stood half turned from the window so as to catch the light on
a copy of _the times_ which he held in his red and freckled hands. he
was reading aloud in stentorian tones from a leading article.
"while this country," he bawled sonorously, "cannot ... in h'our
belief ... hevade ... er ... responsibility ... er ... h'm disquieting
sitwation ..."
"dear me!" thought robin to himself, "what a very extraordinary morning
pursuit for our police!"
suddenly the reading was interrupted.
robin heard the library door open. then manderton's voice cried:
"that'll do, thank you, sergeant!"
"did you 'ear me, sir?" asked the sergeant, who seemed very much
relieved to be quit of his task.
"not a word!" was the reply. "but we'll try with the library door open!
i'll go back to the hall and you start again!"
a thoughtful look on his face, robin turned quickly and, hurrying round
the side of the house, entered by the front door. standing by the door
leading to the library corridor he found manderton.
the detective did not seem particularly glad to see him.
"good-morning, inspector," said robin affably, "you're early to work, i
see. having a little experiment, eh?"
manderton nodded without replying. then the stentorian tones of sergeant
harris proclaiming the views of "the thunderer" on the silesian
situation rolled down the corridor and struck distinctly on the ears of
the listeners in the hall.
presently manderton closed the corridor door, shutting off the sound
abruptly.
"i think you said you could not hear the sergeant with the library door
shut?" queried robin suavely.
"with the door shut--no," answered the detective shortly. "but with the
door open ..."
he broke off significantly and dropped his eyes to his boots.
"would it be troubling you," robin struck in, "if we pushed your
experiment one step farther?"
manderton lifted his eyes and looked at the young man, robin met his
gaze unflinchingly.
"well?"
there was no invitation in his voice, but robin affected to disregard
the other's coldness.
"let the library door be shut," said robin, "but leave the glass door
leading into the garden open. then give sergeant harris another trial at
his reading...."
the detective smiled rather condescendingly.
"with the library door shut, you'll hear nothing," he remarked.
"the library window is open," robin retorted, "or rather it is as good
as open, as one of the two big panes is smashed...."
his voice vibrated with eagerness. the detective looked at him
curiously.
"oh, try if you like," he said carelessly.
without waiting for his assent, robin had already plucked open the
corridor door and was halfway down the passage as the other replied. he
was back again almost at once and, motioning the detective to silence,
took his place at his side by the open door. then the sound of the
policeman's voice was heard from the corridor. it was muffled and
indistinct so that the sense of his words could not be made out. but the
voice was audible enough.
robin turned to the detective.
"bude could make out no words," he said.
"but how do we know that the glass door was open?" queried the detective
sceptically.
"because i left it open myself," robin countered promptly, "when i went
out for my walk before tea. sir horace told me that he found the door
banging about in the wind when he went out to get into the library by
the window."
mr. manderton allowed his fat, serious face to expand very slowly into a
broad, superior smile.
"doesn't it seem a little curious," he said, "that mr. hartley parrish
should choose to sit and work in the library on a gusty and dark winter
evening with the window wide open? you'll allow, i think, that the
window was not broken until after his death ..."
robin's nerves were ragged. the man's tone nettled him exceedingly. but
he confined himself to making a little gesture of impatience.
"no, no, sir," said mr. manderton, very decidedly, "i prefer to think
that the library door was open, left open by the party who went in to
speak to mr. parrish yesterday afternoon ... and who knows more about
the gentleman's suicide than he would have people think ..."
robin boiled over fairly at this.
"good god, man!" he exclaimed, "do you accept this theory of suicide as
blandly as all that? have you examined the body? don't you use your
eyes? i tell you ... bah, what's the use? i'm not here to do your work
for you!..."
"no, sir," said the detective, quite unruffled, "you are not. and i
think i'll continue to see about it myself!"
with that he opened the corridor door and vanished down the passage.
with great deliberation robin selected a cigarette from his case, lit
it, and walked out through the front door into the fresh air again. more
than ever he felt the riddle of hartley parrish's death weighing upon
his mind.
his intuitive sense rebelled against the theory of suicide, despite the
medical evidence, despite the revolver in the dead man's hand, despite
the detective's assurance. and floating about in his brain, like the
gossamer on the glistening bushes in the gardens, were broken threads of
vague suspicions, of half-formed theories, leading from his hasty
observations in the death chamber ...
in itself the death of hartley parrish left him cold. yes, he must admit
that. but the look in mary trevert's eyes, as she had urged him to
shield himself from the suspicion of having driven hartley parrish to
his death, haunted him. already dimly he was beginning to realize that
hartley parrish in death might prove as insuperable a bar between him
and mary trevert as ever he had been in life ...
she was now a wealthy woman. hartley parrish's will had ensured that, he
knew. but it was not the barrier of riches that robin greve feared. he
had asked mary trevert to be his wife before there was any thought of
her inheriting parrish's fortune. he derived a little consolation from
that reflection. at least he could not appear as a fortune-hunter in her
eyes. but, until he could clear himself of the suspicion lurking in mary
trevert's mind that he, robin greve, was in some way implicated in
hartley parrish's death, the dead man, he felt, would always stand
between them. and so ...
robin pitched the stump of his cigarette into a rose bush with a little
gesture of resignation. almost without knowing it, he had strolled into
the rosery up a shallow flight of steps cut into the bank of green
turf, which ran along the side of the house facing the library window to
the corner of the house where it met the clipped box-hedge of the
pleasure ground.
the rosery was a pleasant rectangle framed in a sort of rustic bower
which in the summer was covered with superb roses of every hue and
variety. gravel paths intersected rose-beds cut into all manner of
fantastic shapes where stood the slender shoots of the young rose-trees
each with its tag setting forth its kind, for hartley parrish had been
an enthusiastic amateur in this direction.
robin turned round and faced the house. from his elevation he could look
down into the library through the window with its shattered pane. he
could see the gleaming polish on hartley parrish's big desk and the
great arm-chair pushed back as hartley parrish had pushed it from him
just before his death.
the bare poles of the woodwork festooned with the black arms of the
creeping roses, standing out dark in the fast falling winter evening,
must, he reflected, have been the last view that hartley parrish had had
before ...
but then he broke off his meditations abruptly. his eye had fallen on a
narrow white patch standing out on one of the uprights supporting the
clambering roses.
it was a stout young tree, the light brown bark left adhering to its
surface. it was a long blaze on the bark on the side of the trunk which
had caught his eye. robin walked round the gravel path until he was
within a foot of the pole to get a better view.
the pole stood almost exactly opposite the library window. the scar in
the bark was high up and diagonal and quite freshly made, for the wood
was dead white and much splintered.
the young man put a hand on the upright for support and leant forward,
carefully refraining from putting his foot on the soft brown mould of
the flower-bed which fringed the path between it and the rustic
woodwork. then he ran lightly down the steps until he stood with his
back to the library window. from here he carefully surveyed the upright
again, then, returning to the rosery, began a careful scrutiny of the
gravel paths and the beds.
apparently his search gave little result, for he presently abandoned it
and turned his attention to the wooden framework on the other side of
the rectangular rose-garden. he plunged boldly in among the rose-bushes
and examined each upright in turn. he spent about half an hour in this
meticulous investigation, and then, his boots covered with mould, his
rough shooting-coat glistening with moisture, he walked slowly down the
steps and reentered the house.
as he was wiping the mud off his boots on the great mat in the front
hall, bude came out of the lounge hall with a pile of dishes on a tray.
"bude," said robin, "can you tell me if the fire in the library has been
smoking of late?"
"well, sir," replied the butler, "we've always had trouble with that
chimdy when the wind's in the southwest."
"has it been smoking lately?" the young man reiterated his question
impatiently.
the man looked up in surprise.
"well, sir, now you come to mention it, it has. as a matter o'fact, sir,
the sweep was ordered for to-day ..."
"why?"
"well, sir, mr. parrish had mentioned it to me ..."
"when?"
the question came out like a pistol shot.
"yesterday, sir," answered the butler blandly. "just before luncheon, it
was, sir. mr. parrish told me to have that chimdy seen to at once. and i
telephoned for the sweep immediately after luncheon, sir ..."
"did mr. parrish say anything else, bude?"
robin eagerly scanned the butler's fat, unimpressive countenance. bude,
his tray held out stiffly in front of him, contracted his bushy eyebrows
in thought.
"i don't know as he did, sir ..."
"think, man, think!" robin urged.
"well, sir," said bude, unmoved, "i believe, now i come to think of it,
that mr. parrish did say something about the wind blowing his papers
about ..."
"that is to say, he had been working with the window open?"
robin greve's question rang out sharply. it was an affirmation more than
a question.
"yes, sir, leastways i suppose so, sir ..."
"which window?"
"why, the one mr. parrish always liked to have open in the warm weather,
sir, ... the one opposite the desk. the other window was never opened,
sir, because of the dictaphone as stands in front of it. the damp
affects the mechanism ..."
"thank you, bude," said the young man.
with his accustomed majesty the butler wheeled to go. in the turn of his
head as he moved there was a faint suggestion of a shake ... a shake of
uncomprehending pity.
chapter xi
"... speed the parting guest!"
dr. romain was just finishing his breakfast as robin greve entered the
dining-room, a cosy oak-panelled room with a bow window fitted with
cushioned window-seats. horace trevert stood with his back to the fire.
there was no sign of either lady margaret or of mary. silence seemed to
fall on both the doctor and his companion as robin came in. they wore
that rather abashed look which people unconsciously assume when they
break off a conversation on an unexpected entry.
"morning, horace! morning, doctor!" said robin, crossing to the
sideboard. "any sign of lady margaret or mary yet?"
the doctor had risen hastily to his feet.
"i rather think dr. redstone is expecting me," he said rapidly; "i half
promised to go over to stevenish ... think i'll just run over. the
walk'll do me good ..."
he looked rather wildly about him, then fairly bolted from the room.
robin, the cover of the porridge dish in his hand, turned and stared at
him.
"why, whatever's the matter with romain?" he began.
but horace, who had not spoken a word, was himself halfway to the door.
"horace!" called out robin sharply.
the boy stopped with his back towards the other. but he did not turn
round.
robin put the cover back on the porridge dish and crossed the room.
"you all seem in the deuce of a hurry this morning ..." he said.
still the boy made no reply.
"why, horace, what's the matter?"
robin put his hand on young trevert's shoulder. horace shook him roughly
off.
"i don't care to discuss it with you, robin!" he said.
robin deliberately swung the boy round until he faced him.
"my dear old thing," he expostulated. "what does it all mean? _what_
won't you discuss with me?"
horace trevert looked straight at the speaker. his upper lip was pouted
and trembled a little.
"what's the use of talking?" he said. "you know what i mean. or would
you like me to be plainer ..."
robin met his gaze unflinchingly.
"i certainly would," he said, "if it's going to enlighten me as to why
you should suddenly choose to behave like a lunatic ..."
horace trevert leant back and thrust his hands into his pockets.
"after what happened here yesterday," he said, speaking very clearly and
deliberately, "i wonder you have the nerve to stay ..."
"my dear horace," said robin quite impassively, "would you mind being a
little more explicit? what precisely are you accusing me of? what have i
done?"
"done?" exclaimed the young man heatedly. "done? good god! don't you
realize that you have dragged my sister into this wretched business?
don't you understand that her name will be bandied about before a lot of
rotten yokels at the inquest?"
robin greve's eyes glittered dangerously.
"i confess," he said, with elaborate politeness, "i scarcely understand
what it has to do with me that hartley parrish should apparently commit
suicide within a few days of becoming engaged to your sister ..."
"ha!"
horace trevert snorted indignantly.
"you don't understand, don't you? we don't understand either. but, i
must say, we thought _you_ did!"
with that he turned to go. but robin caught him by the arm.
"listen to me, horace," he said. "i'm not going to quarrel with you in
this house of death. but you're going to tell here and now what you
meant by that remark. do you understand? i'm going to know!"
horace trevert shook himself free.
"certainly you shall know," he answered with _hauteur_, "but i must say
i should have thought that, as a lawyer and so on, you would have
guessed my meaning without my having to explain. what i mean is that,
now that hartley parrish is dead, there is only one man who knows what
drove him to his death. and that's yourself! do you want it plainer than
that?"
robin took a step back and looked at his friend. but he did not speak.
"and now," the boy continued, "perhaps you will realize that your
presence here is disagreeable to mary ..."
"did mary ask you to tell me this?" robin broke in.
his voice had lost its hardness. it was almost wistful. the change of
tone was so marked that it struck horace. he hesitated an instant.
"yes," he blurted out. "she doesn't want to see you again. i don't want
to be offensive, robin.."
"please don't apologize," said greve. "i quite understand that this is
your sister's house now and, of course, i shall leave at once. i'll ask
jay to pack my things if you could order the car ..."
the boy moved towards the door. before he reached it robin called him
back.
"horace," he said pleasantly, "before you go i want you to answer me a
question. think before you speak, because it's very important. when you
got into the library yesterday evening through the window, you smashed
the glass, didn't you?"
horace trevert nodded.
"yes," he replied, looking hard at robin.
"why?"
"to get into the room, of course!"
"was the window bolted?"
the boy stopped and thought.
"no," he said slowly, "now i come to think of it, i don't believe it
was. no, of course, it wasn't. i just put my arm through the broken pane
and shoved the window up. but why do you ask?"
"oh, nothing," answered robin nonchalantly. "i just was curious to know,
that's all!"
horace stood and looked at him for an instant. then he went out.
a quarter of an hour later, hartley parrish's rolls-royce glided through
the straggling main street of stevenish. a chapel bell tinkled
unmusically, and on the pavements, gleaming with wet, went a procession
of neatly dressed townsfolk bound, prayer-book in hand, for their
respective places of worship. a newsboy, sorting out the sunday
newspapers which had just come down by train from london, was the only
figure visible on the little station platform. robin bought a selection.
"there's all about mr. parrish," said the boy, "'im as they found dead
up at 'arkings las' night. and the noospapers 'asn't 'arf been sendin'
down to-day ... reporters and photographers ... you oughter seen the
crowd as come by the mornin' train ..."
"i wonder what they'll get out of manderton," commented robin rather
grimly to himself as his train puffed leisurely, after the habit of
sunday trains, into the quiet little station.
in the solitude of his first-class smoker he unfolded the newspapers.
none had more than the brief fact that hartley parrish had been found
dead with a pistol in his hand, but they made up for the briefness of
their reports by long accounts of the dead man's "meteoric career."
and, robin noted with relief, hitherto mary trevert's name was out of
the picture.
he dropped the papers on to the seat, and, as the train steamed serenely
through the sunday calm of the country towards london's outer suburbs,
he reviewed in his mind such facts as he had gleaned regarding the
circumstances of his late host's death.
he would, he told himself, accept for the time being as _facts_ what, he
admitted to himself, so far only seemed to be such. hartley parrish,
then, had been seated in his library at his desk with the door locked.
the fire was smoking, and therefore he had opened the window. according
to horace trevert, the window had not been bolted when he had entered
the library, for, after smashing the pane in the assumption that the
bolt was shot, he had had no difficulty in pushing up the window.
hartley parrish had opened the window himself, for on the nail of the
middle finger of his left hand robin had seen, with the aid of the
magnifying-glass, a tiny fragment of white paint.
who had closed it? he had no answer ready to _that_ question.
now, as to the circumstances of the shooting. the suicide theory invited
one to believe that hartley parrish had got up from his desk, pushing
back his chair, had gone round it until he stood between the desk and
the window, and had there shot himself through the heart. why should he
have done this?
robin had no answer ready to this question either. he passed on again.
bude had heard loud voices a very few minutes before mary had heard the
shot. that morning's experiments had shown that bude could have heard
these sounds only by way of the open window of the library and the open
doors of the garden and the library corridor. additional proof, if bude
had heard aright, that the library window was open.
leaning back in his seat, his finger-tips pressed together, robin greve
resolutely faced the situation to which his deductions were leading him.
"the voice heard at the open window," he told himself, "was the voice of
the man who murdered parrish and who closed the window, that is, of
course, if the murder theory proves more conclusive than that of
suicide."
this brought him back to his investigations in the rosery. the abrasure
he had discovered on the timber upright was the mark of a bullet and a
mark freshly made at that. moreover, it had almost certainly been fired
from the library window--from the window which parrish had opened; the
angle at which it had struck and marked the tree showed that almost
conclusively.
yet there had been but one shot! if only he had been able to find that
bullet in the rosery! robin thought ruefully of his long hunt among the
sopping rose-bushes.
yes, there had been only one shot. mary trevert had stated it
definitely. besides, the bullet that had killed hartley parrish had been
fired from his own revolver and had been found in the body. robin greve
felt the murder theory collapsing about him. but the suicide theory did
not stand up, either. what possible, probable motive had hartley parrish
for taking his own life?
"he wasn't the man to do it!"
the wheels of the train took up the rhythm of the phrase and dinned it
into his ears.
"he wasn't the man to do it!"
the riddle seemed more baffling than ever.
robin thrust one hand into his right-hand pocket to get his pipe, his
other hand into his left-hand pocket to find his pouch. his left hand
came into contact with a little ball of paper.
he drew it out. it was the little ball of slatey-blue paper he had found
on the floor of the library beside hartley parrish's dead body.
chapter xii
mr. manderton is nonplussed
horace trevert walked abruptly into mary's chinese boudoir. lady
margaret and the girl were standing by the fire.
"well," said horace, dropping into a chair, "he's gone!"
"who?" said lady margaret.
"robin," answered the boy, "and i must say he took it very well ..."
"you don't mean to tell me, horace," said his mother, "that you have
actually sent robin greve away ...?"
mary trevert put her hand on her mother's arm.
"i wished it, mother. i asked horace to send him away ..."
"but, my dear," protested lady margaret.
mary interrupted her impatiently.
"robin greve was impossible here. i had to ask him to go. i suppose he
can come back if ... if they want him for the inquest ..."
lady margaret was looking at her daughter in a puzzled way. she was a
woman of the world and had brought her daughter up to be a woman of the
world. she knew that mary was not impulsive by nature. she knew that
there was a wealth of good sense behind those steady eyes.
in response to a look from his mother, horace got up and left the room.
"mary, dear," said the older woman, "don't you think you are making a
mistake?"
the girl turned away, one slim shoe tapping restlessly against the brass
rail of the fireplace.
"my dear," her mother went on, "remember i have known robin greve all
his life. his father, the admiral, was a very old friend of mine. he was
the very personification of honour. robin is very fond of you ... no, he
has told me nothing, but i _know_. don't you think it is rather hard on
an old friend to turn him away just when you most want him?"
there was a heightened colour in the girl's face as she turned and
looked her mother in the face.
"robin has not behaved like a friend, mother," she answered. "he knows
more than he pretends about ... about this. and he lets me find out
things from the servants when he ought to have told me himself. if he is
suspected of having said something to hartley which made him do this
dreadful thing, he has only himself to thank. i _did_ try to shield
him--before i knew. but i'm not going to do so any more. if he stays i
shall have the police suspecting me all the time. and i owe something
to hartley ..."
her mother sighed a soft little sigh. she said nothing. she was a very
wise woman.
"robin left me to go to the library ... i am sure of that ..." mary went
on breathlessly.
"why?" her mother asked.
the girl hesitated.
then she said slowly:
"you and i have always been good pals, mother, so i may as well tell
you. robin had just asked me to marry him. so i told him i was engaged
to hartley. he went on in the most awful way, and said that i was
selling myself and that i would not be the first girl that hartley had
kept ..."
she broke off and raised her hands to her face. then she put her elbows
on the mantel-shelf and burst into tears.
"oh, it was hateful," she sobbed.
her mother put her arm round her soothingly.
"well, my dear," she said, "robin was always fond of you, and i dare say
it was a shock to him. when men feel like that about a girl they
generally say things they don't mean ..."
mary trevert straightened herself up and dropped her hands to her side.
she faced her mother, the tear-drops glistening on her long lashes.
"he meant it, every word of it. and he was perfectly right. i _was_
selling myself, and you know i was, mother. do you think we can go on
for ever like this, living on credit and dodging tradesmen? i meant to
marry hartley and stick to him. but i never thought ... i never
guessed ... that robin ..."
"i know, my dear," her mother interposed, "i know. perhaps it doesn't
sound a very proper thing to say in the circumstances, but now that poor
hartley is gone, there is no reason whatsoever why you and robin ..."
the treverts were a hot-tempered race. lady margaret's unfinished
sentence seemed to infuriate the girl.
"do you think i'd marry robin greve as long as i thought he knew the
mystery of hartley's death!" she cried passionately. "i was willing to
give up my self-respect once to save us from ruin, but i won't do it
again. i'm not surprised to find you thinking i am ready to marry robin
and live happy ever after on poor hartley's money. but i've not sunk so
low as that! if you ever mention this to me again, mother, i promise you
i'll go away and never come back!"
"my dear child," temporized lady margaret, eyebrows raised in protest
at this outburst, "of course, it shall be as you wish. i only
thought ..."
but mary trevert was not listening. she leant on the mantel-shelf, her
dark head in her hands, and she murmured:
"the tragedy of it! my god, the tragedy of it!"
lady margaret twisted the rings on her long white fingers.
"the tragedy of it, my dear," she said, "is that you have sent away the
man you love at a time when you will never need him so badly again ..."
there was a discreet tapping at the door.
"come in!" said lady margaret.
bude appeared.
"mr. manderton, the detective, my lady, was wishing to know whether he
might see miss trevert ..."
"yes. ask him to come up here," commanded lady margaret.
"he is without--in the corridor, my lady!"
he stepped back and in a moment mr. manderton stepped into the room,
big, burly, and determined.
he made a little stiff bow to the two ladies and halted irresolute near
the door.
"you wished to see my daughter, mr. manderton," said lady margaret.
the detective bowed again.
"and you, too, my lady," he said. "allow me!"
he closed the door, then crossed to the fireplace.
"after i had seen you and miss trevert last night, my lady," he began,
"i had a talk with mr. jeekes, mr. parrish's principal secretary, who
came down by car from london as soon as he heard the news. my lady, i
think this is a fairly simple case!"
he paused and scanned the carpet.
"mr. jeekes tells me, my lady," he went on presently, "that mrs parrish
had been suffering from neurasthenia and a weak heart brought on by too
much smoking. it appears that he had consulted, within the last two
months, two leading specialists of harley street about his health. one
of these gentlemen, sir winterton maire, ordered him to knock off all
work and all smoking for at least three months. he will give evidence to
this effect at the inquest. mr. parrish disregarded these orders as he
was wishful to put through his scheme for hornaway's before taking a
rest. mr. jeekes can prove that. in these circumstances, my lady...."
"well?"
lady margaret, in her black crepe de chine dress, setting off the
silvery whiteness of her hair, was a calm, unemotional figure as she sat
in her lacquer chair.
"well?" she asked again.
"well," said the detective, "the verdict will be one of 'suicide whilst
of unsound mind,' and in my opinion the medical evidence will be
sufficient to bring that in. there will not be occasion, i fancy, my
lady, to probe any farther into the motives of mr. parrish's action...."
"and are you personally satisfied"--mary's voice broke in clear and
unimpassioned--"are you personally satisfied, mr. manderton, that mr.
parrish shot himself?"
the detective cast an appealing glance at the tips of his well-burnished
boots.
"yes, miss, i think i may say i am...."
"and what about the evidence of bude, who said he heard voices in the
library...."
mr. manderton gave his shoulders the merest suspicion of a shrug, raised
his hands, and dropped them to his sides.
"i had hoped, my lady," he said, throwing a glance at lady margaret,
"and you, miss, that i had made it clear that in the circumstances we
need not pursue that matter any further...."
lady margaret rose. her dominating personality seemed to fill the room.
"we are extremely obliged to you, mr. manderton," she said, "for the
able and discreet way in which you have handled this case. i sometimes
meet the chief commissioner at dinner. i shall write to sir maurice and
tell him my opinion."
mr. manderton reddened a little.
"your ladyship is too good," he said.
lady margaret bowed to signify that the interview was at an end. but
mary trevert left her side and walked to the door.
"will you come downstairs with me, mr. manderton," she said. "i should
like to speak to you alone for a minute!"
she led the way downstairs through the hall and out into the drive. a
pale sun shone down from a grey and rainy sky, and the damp breeze
blowing from the sodden trees played among the ringlets of her dark
hair.
"we will walk down the drive," she said to the detective, who, rather
astonished, had followed her. "we can talk freely out of doors."
they took a dozen steps in silence. then she said:
"who was it speaking to mr. parrish in the library?"
"undoubtedly mr. greve," replied the man without hesitation.
"why undoubtedly?" asked the girl.
"it could have been no one else. we know that he left you hot to get at
mr. parrish and have words with him. bude heard them talking with voices
raised aloud...."
"but if the door were locked?"
"mr. parrish may have opened it and locked it again, mr. greve getting
out by the window. but there are no traces of that ... one would look to
find marks on the paint on the inside. besides, a little test we made
this morning suggests that mr. greve spoke to mr. parrish through the
window...."
"was the window open?"
"yes, miss, it probably was. the fire had been smoking in the library.
mr. parrish had complained to bude about it. besides, we have found mr.
parrish's finger-prints on the inside of the window-frame. outside we
found other finger-prints ... sir horace's. sir horace was good enough
to allow his to be taken."
the girl looked at the detective quickly.
"were there any other finger-prints except horace's on the outside?" she
asked.
mr. manderton shook his head.
"no, miss," he answered.
they had reached the lodge-gates at the beginning of the drive and
turned to retrace their steps to the house.
"then we shall never know exactly why mr. parrish did this thing?"
hazarded mary.
mr. manderton darted her a surreptitious glance.
"we shall see about that," he said.
there was menace in his voice.
mary trevert stopped. she put her hand on the detective's arm.
"mr. manderton," she said, "if you are satisfied, then, believe me, i
am!"
the detective bowed.
"miss trevert," he said,--and he spoke perfectly respectfully though his
words were blunt,--"i can well believe that!"
the girl looked up quickly. she scanned his face rather apprehensively.
"what do you mean?" she asked, "i don't understand...."
"i mean," was the detective's answer, given in his quiet, level voice,
"that when you attempted to mislead inspector humphries you did nobody
any good!"
the girl bent her head without replying, and in silence they regained
the house. at the house door they parted, mary going indoors while the
detective remained standing on the drive. very deliberately he produced
a short briar pipe, cut a stub of dark plug tobacco from a flat piece he
carried in his pocket, crammed the tobacco into his pipe, and lit it.
reflectively he blew a thin spiral of smoke into the still air.
"_he_ told me about that fat butler's evidence," he said to himself;
"_he_ put me wise about that window being open; _he_ gave me the office
about the paint on the finger-nails of mr. h.p."
he ticked off each point on his fingers with the stem of his pipe.
"why?" said mr. manderton aloud, addressing a laurel-bush.
chapter xiii
jeekes
mr. albert edward jeekes, hartley parrish's principal private secretary,
lunched with lady margaret, mary and horace. dr. romain seemed not to
have got over his embarrassment of the morning, for he did not put in an
appearance.
mr. jeekes was an old young man who supported bravely the weight of his
christian names, a reminder of his mother having occupied some small
post in the household of queen victoria the good. he might have been any
age between 35 and 50 with his thin sandy hair, his myopic gaze, and his
habitual expression of worried perplexity.
he was a shorthand-writer and typist of incredible dexterity and speed
which, combined with an unquenchable energy, had recommended him to
hartley parrish. accordingly, in consideration of a salary which he
would have been the first to describe as "princely," he had during the
past four years devoted some fifteen hours a day to the service of mr.
hartley parrish.
he was unmarried. when not on duty, either at st. james's square,
harkings, or hartley parrish's palatial offices in broad street, he was
to be found at one of those immense and gloomy clubs of indiscriminate
membership which are dotted about the parish of st. james's, s.w., and
to which mr. jeekes was in the habit of referring in early-victorian
accents of respect.
"when i heard the news at the club, miss trevert," said jeekes, "you
could have knocked me down with a feather. mr. parrish, as all of us
knew, worked himself a great deal too hard, sometimes not knocking off
for his tea, even, and wore his nerves all to pieces. but i never
dreamed it would come to this. ah! he's a great loss, and what we shall
do without him i don't know. there was a piece in one of the papers
about him to-day--perhaps you saw it?--it called him 'one of the
captains of industry of modern england.'"
"you were always a great help to him, mr. jeekes," said mary, who was
touched by the little man's hero-worship; "i am sure you realized that
he appreciated you."
"well," replied mr. jeekes, rubbing the palms of his hands together, "he
did a great deal for _me_. took me out of a city office where i was
getting two pound five a week. that's what he did. it was a shipping
firm. i tell you this because it has a bearing, miss trevert, on what
is to follow. why did he pick me? i'll tell you.
"he was passing through the front office with one of our principals when
he asked him, just casually, what union pacific stood at. the boss
didn't know.
"'a hundred and eighty-seven london parity,' says i. he turned round and
looked at me. 'how do you know that?' says he, rather surprised, this
being in a shipping office, you understand.
"'i take an interest in the markets,' i replied. 'do you?' he says.
'then you might do for me,' and tells me to come and see him."
"i went. he made me an offer. when i heard the figure ... my word!"
mr. jeekes paused. then added sadly:
"and i had meant to work for him to my dying day!"
they were in the billiard-room seated on the selfsame settee, mary
reflected, on which she and robin had sat--how long ago it seemed,
though only yesterday! mary had carried the secretary off after luncheon
in order to unfold to him a plan which she had been turning over in her
mind ever since her conversation with the detective.
"and what are you going to do now, mr. jeekes?" she asked.
the little man pursed up his lips.
"well," he said, "i'll have to get something else, i expect. i'm not
expecting to find anything so good as i had with mr. parrish. and things
are pretty crowded in the city, miss trevert, what with all the boys
back from the war, god bless 'em, and glad we are to see 'em, i'm sure.
i hope you'll realize, miss trevert, that anything i can do to help to
put mr. parrish's affairs straight...."
"i was just about to say," mary broke in, "that i hope you will not
contemplate any change, mr. jeekes. you know more about mr. parrish's
affairs than anybody else, and i shall be very glad if you will stay on
and help me. you know i have been left sole executrix...."
"miss trevert,"--the little man stammered in his embarrassment,--"this
is handsome of you. i surely thought you would have wished to make your
own arrangements, appoint your own secretaries...."
mr. jeekes broke off and looked at her, blinking hard.
"not at all," said mary. "everything shall be as it was. i am sure that
mr. bardy will approve. besides, mr. jeekes, i want your assistance in
something else...."
"anything in my power...." began jeekes.
"listen," said mary.
she was all her old self-composed self now, a charming figure in her
plain blue serge suit with a white silken shirt and black tie--the best
approach to mourning her wardrobe could afford. already the short winter
afternoon was drawing in. mysterious shadows lurked in the corners of
the long and narrow room.
"listen," said mary, leaning forward. "i want to know why mr. parrish
killed himself. i mean to know. and i want you, mr. jeekes, to help me
to find out."
something stirred ever so faintly in the remote recesses of the
billiard-room. a loose board or something creaked softly and was silent.
"what was that?" the girl called out sharply. "who's there?"
mr. jeekes got up and walked over to the door. it was ajar. he closed
it.
"just a board creaking," he said as he resumed his seat.
"i want your aid in finding out the motive for this terrible
deed,"--mary trevert was speaking again,--"i can't understand.... i
don't see clear...."
"miss trevert," said mr. jeekes, clearing his throat fussily, "i fear we
must look for the motive in the state of poor mr. parrish's nerves. an
uncommonly high-strung man he always was, and he smoked those long
black strong cigars of his from morning till night. sir winterton maire
told him flatly--mr. parrish, i recollect, repeated his very words to me
after sir winterton had examined him--that, if he did not take a
complete rest and give up smoking, he would not be answerable for the
consequences. therefore, miss trevert...."
"mr. jeekes," answered the girl, "i knew mr. parrish pretty well. a
woman, you know, gets to the heart of a man's character very often
quicker than his daily associates in business. and i know that mr.
parrish was the last man in the world to have done a thing like that. he
was so ... so undaunted. he made nothing of difficulties. he relied
wholly on himself. that was the secret of his success. for him to have
killed himself like this makes me feel convinced that there was some
hidden reason, far stronger, far more terrible, than any question of
nerves...."
leaning forward, her hands clasped tightly in front of her, mary trevert
raised her dark eyes to the little secretary's face.
"many men have a secret in their lives," she said in a low voice. "do
you know of anything in mr. parrish's life which an enemy might have
made use of to drive him to his death?"
her manner was so intense that mr. jeekes quite lost his
self-composure. he clutched at his _pince-nez_ and readjusted them upon
his nose to cover his embarrassment. the secretary was not used to
gazing at beautiful women whose expressive features showed as clearly as
this the play of the emotions.
"miss trevert," he said presently, "i know of no such secret. but then
what do i--what does any one--know of mr. parrish's former life?"
"we might make enquiries in south africa?" ventured the girl.
"i doubt if we should learn anything much through that," said the
secretary. "of course, mr. parrish had great responsibilities and
responsibility means worry...."
a silence fell on them both. from somewhere in the dark shadows above
the fire glowing red through the falling twilight a clock chimed once.
there was a faint rustling from the neighborhood of the door. mr. jeekes
started violently. a coal dropped noisily into the fireplace.
"there was something else," said mary, ignoring the interruption, and
paused. she did not look up when she spoke again.
"there is often a woman in cases like this," she began reluctantly.
mr. jeekes looked extremely uncomfortable.
"miss trevert," he said, "i beg you will not press me on that
score...."
"why?" asked the girl bluntly.
"because ... because"--mr. jeekes stumbled sadly over his
words--"because, dear me, there are some things which really i couldn't
possibly discuss ... if you'll excuse me...."
"oh, but you can discuss everything, mr. jeekes," replied mary trevert
composedly. "i am not a child, you know. i am perfectly well aware that
there's a woman somewhere in the life of every man, very often two or
three. i haven't got any illusions on the subject, i assure you. i never
supposed for a moment that i was the first woman in mr. parrish's
life...."
this candour seemed to administer a knock-out blow to the little
secretary's victorian mind. he was speechless. he took off his
_pince-nez_, blindly polished them with his pocket-handkerchief and
replaced them upon his nose. his fingers trembled violently.
"i have no wish to appear vulgarly curious," the girl went on,--mr.
jeekes made a quick gesture of dissent,--"but i am anxious to know
whether mr. parrish was being blackmailed ... or anything like that...."
"oh, no, miss trevert, i do assure you," the little man expostulated in
hasty denial, "nothing like that, i am convinced. at least, that is to
say ..."
he rose to his feet, clutching the little _attache_ case which he
invariably carried with him as a kind of emblem of office.
"and now, if you'll excuse me, miss trevert," he muttered, "i should
really be going. i am due at mr. bardy's office at five o'clock. he is
coming up from the country specially to meet me. there is so much to
discuss with regard to this terrible affair."
he glanced at his watch.
"with the roads as greasy as they are," he added, "it will take me all
my time in the car to ..."
he cast a panic-stricken glance around him. but mary trevert held him
fast.
"you didn't finish what you were saying about mr. parrish, mr. jeekes,"
she said impassively. the secretary made no sign. but he looked a trifle
sullen.
"i don't think you realize, mr. jeekes," she said, "that other people
besides myself are keenly interested in the motives for mr. parrish's
suicide. the police profess to be willing to accept the testimony of the
specialists as satisfactory medical evidence about his state of mind.
but i distrust that man, manderton. he is not satisfied, mr. jeekes. he
won't rest until he knows the truth."
the secretary cast her a frightened glance.
"but mr. manderton told me himself, miss trevert," he affirmed, "that
the verdict would be, 'suicide while temporarily insane,' on sir
winterton maire's evidence alone ..."
mary trevert tapped the ground impatiently with her foot.
"manderton will get at the truth, i tell you," she said. "he's that kind
of man. do you want me to find out from them? at the inquest, perhaps?"
the secretary put his _attache_ case down on the lounge again.
"of course, that would be most improper, miss trevert," he said. "but
your question embarrasses me. it embarrasses me very much ..."
"what are you keeping back from me, mr. jeekes?" the girl demanded
imperiously.
the secretary mopped his forehead with his handkerchief. then, as though
with an effort, he spoke.
"there is a lady, a french lady, who draws an income from mr. parrish ..."
the girl remained impassive, but her eyes grew rather hard.
"these payments are still going on?" she asked.
jeekes hesitated. then he nodded,
"yes," he said.
"well? was she blackmailing ... him?"
"no, no," mr. jeekes averred hastily. "but there was some unpleasantness
some months ago ... er ... a county court action, to be precise, about
some bills she owed. mr. parrish was very angry about it and settled to
prevent it coming into court. but there was some talk about it ... in
legal circles ..."
he threw a rather scared glance at the girl.
"please explain yourself, mr. jeekes," she said coldly. "i don't
understand ..."
"her lawyer was le hagen--it's a shady firm with a big criminal
practice. they sometimes brief mr. greve ..."
mary trevert clasped and unclasped her hands quickly.
"i quite understand, mr. jeekes," she said. "you needn't say any more ..."
she turned away in a manner that implied dismissal. it was as though she
had forgotten the secretary's existence. he picked up his _attache_ case
and walked slowly to the door.
a sharp exclamation broke from his lips.
"miss trevert," he cried, "the door ... i shut it a little while
back ... look, it's ajar!"
the girl who stood at the fire switched on the electric light by the
mantelpiece.
"is ... is ... the door defective? doesn't it shut properly?"
the little secretary forced out the questions in an agitated voice.
the girl walked across the room and shut the door. it closed perfectly,
a piece of solid, well-fitting oak.
"what does it mean?" said mr. jeekes in a whisper. "you understand, i
should not wish what i told you just now about mr. parrish to be
overheard ..."
they opened the door again. the dusky corridor was empty.
chapter xiv
a sheet of blue paper
the sight of that crumpled ball of slatey-blue paper brought back to
robin's mind with astonishing vividness every detail of the scene in the
library. once more he looked into hartley parrish's staring, unseeing
eyes, saw the firelight gleam again on the heavy gold signet ring on the
dead man's hand, the tag of the dead man's bootlace as it trailed from
one sprawling foot across the carpet. once more he felt the dark cloud
of the mystery envelop him as a mist and with a little sigh he smoothed
out the crumpled paper.
it was an ordinary quarto sheet of stoutish paper, with a glazed
surface, of an unusual shade of blue, darker than what the stationers
call "azure," yet lighter than legal blue. at the top right-hand corner
was typewritten a date: "nov. 25." otherwise the sheet was blank.
the curious thing about it was that a number of rectangular slits had
been cut in the paper. robin counted them. there were seven. they were
of varying sizes, the largest a little over an inch, the smallest not
more than a quarter of an inch, in length. in depth they measured about
an eighth of an inch.
robin stared at the paper uncomprehendingly. he remembered perfectly
where he had found it on the floor of the library at harkings, between
the dead body and the waste-paper basket. the basket, he recalled, stood
out in the open just clear of the desk on the left-hand side. from the
position in which it was lying the ball of paper might have been aimed
for the waste-paper basket and, missing it, have fallen on the carpet.
robin turned the sheet over. the back was blank. then he held the paper
up to the light. yes, there was a water-mark. now it was easily
discernible. "egmont ff. qu." he made out.
the train was slowing down. robin glanced out of the window and saw that
they were crossing the river in the mirky gloom of a london winter
sunday. he balanced the sheet of paper in his hands for a moment. then
he folded it carefully into four and stowed it away in his
cigarette-case. the next moment the train thumped its way into charing
cross.
a taxi deposited him at the middle temple gate. he walked the short
distance to the set of chambers he occupied. on his front door a piece
of paper was pinned. by the rambling calligraphy and the phonetic
english he recognized the hand of his "laundress."
dere sir [it ran], mr rite call he want to see u
pertikler i tole im as you was in country & give im ur
adress hope i dun rite mrs bragg
robin had scarcely got his key in the door of his "oak" when there was a
step on the stair. a nice-looking young man with close-cropped fair hair
appeared round the turn of the staircase.
"hullo, robin," he exclaimed impetuously, "i _am_ glad to have caught
you like this. your woman gave me your address, so i rang up harkings at
once and they told me you had just gone back to town. so i came straight
here. you remember me, don't you? bruce wright ... but perhaps i'm
butting in. if you'd rather see me some other time...."
"my dear boy," said robin, motioning him into the flat, "of course i
remember you. only i didn't recognize you just for the minute. shove
your hat down here in the hall. and as for butting in,"--he threw open
the door of the living-room,--"why! i think there is no other man in
england i would so gladly see at this very moment as yourself."
the living-room was a bright and cheery place, tastefully furnished in
old oak with gay chintz curtains. it looked out on an old-world paved
court in the centre of which stood a solitary soot-laden plane-tree.
"what's this rot about parrish having committed suicide?" demanded the
boy abruptly.
robin gave him in the briefest terms an outline of the tragedy.
"poor old h.p., eh?" mused young wright; "who'd have thought it?"
"but the idea of suicide is preposterous," he broke out suddenly. "i
knew parrish probably better than anybody. he would never have done a
thing like that. it must have been an accident...."
robin shook his head.
"that possibility is ruled out by the medical evidence," he said, and
stopped short.
bruce wright, who had been pacing up and down the room, halted in front
of the barrister.
"i tell you that parrish was not the man to commit suicide. nothing
would have even forced him to take his own life. you know, i was working
with him as his personal secretary every day for more than two years,
and i am sure!"
he resumed his pacing up and down the room.
"has it ever occurred to you, robin," he said presently, "that
practically nothing is known of h.p.'s antecedents? for instance, do you
know where he was born?"
"i understand he was a canadian," replied robin with a shrewd glance at
the flushed face of the boy.
"he's lived in canada," said wright, "but originally he was a cockney,
from the london slums. and i believe i am the only person who knows
that...."
robin pushed an armchair at his companion.
"sit down and tell me about it," he commanded.
the boy dropped into the chair.
"it was after i had been only a few months with him," he began, "shortly
after i was discharged from the army with that lung wound of mine. we
were driving back in the car from some munition works near baling, and
the chauffeur took a wrong turning near wormwood scrubs and got into a
maze of dirty streets round there...."
"i know," commented robin, "notting dale, they call it...."
"h.p. wasn't noticing much," wright went on, "as he was dictating
letters to me,--we used to do a lot of work in the rolls-royce in those
rush days,--but, directly he noticed that the chauffeur was uncertain of
the road, he shoved his head out of the window and put him right at
once. i suppose i seemed surprised at his knowing his way about those
parts, for he laughed at me and said: 'i was born and brought up down
here, bruce, in a little greengrocer's shop just off the latimer road.'
i said nothing because i didn't want to interrupt his train of thought.
he had never talked to me or jeekes or any of us like that before.
"'by gad,' he went on, 'how the smell of the place brings back those
days to me--the smell of decayed fruit, of stale fish, of dirt! why, it
seems like yesterday that victor marbran and i used to drive round
uncle's cart with vegetables and coal. what a life to escape from,
bruce, my boy! gad, you can count yourself lucky!'
"he was like a man talking to himself. i asked him how he had broken
away from it all. at that he laughed, a bitter, hard sort of laugh. 'by
having the guts to break away from it, boy,' he said. 'it was i who made
victor marbran come away with me. we worked our passages out to the cape
and made our way up-country to matabeleland. that was in the early days
of rhodes and barney barnato--long before i went to canada. i made
victor's fortune for him and mine as well. but i made more than victor
and he never forgave me. he'd do me a bad turn if he could ...'
"then he broke off short and went on with his dictating ..."
"did he ever come back to this phase of his life?"
"only when we got out of the car that morning. he said to me: 'forget
what i told you to-day, young fellow. never rake up a man's past!' and
he never mentioned the subject again. of course, i didn't either ..."
stretched full length in his chair, his eyes fixed on the ceiling, robin
remained lost in thought.
"the conversation came back to me to-day," said the boy, "when i read of
parrish's death. and i wondered ..."
"well?"
"whether the secret of his death may not be found somewhere in his
adventurous past. you see he said that victor marbran was an enemy. then
there was something else. i never told you--when you took all that
trouble to get me another job after parrish had sacked me--the exact
reason for my dismissal. you never asked me either. that was decent of
you, robin ..."
"i liked you, bruce," said robin shortly.
"well, i'll tell you now," he said. "when i joined h.p.'s staff after i
got out of the army, i was put under old jeekes, of course, to learn the
work. one of the first injunctions he gave me was with regard to mr.
parrish's letters. i suppose you know more or less how secretaries of a
big business man like hartley parrish work. they open all letters, lay
the important ones before the big man for him to deal with personally,
make a digest of the others or deal with them direct ..."
robin nodded.
"well," the boy resumed, "the first thing old jeekes told me was that
letters arriving in a blue envelope and marked 'personal' were never to
be opened ..."
"in a blue envelope?" echoed robin quickly.
"yes, a particular kind of blue--a sort of slatey-blue--jeekes showed me
one as a guide. well, these letters were to be handed to mr. parrish
unopened."
robin had stood up.
"that's odd," he said, diving in his pocket.
"i say, hold on a bit," protested the boy, "this is really rather
important what i am telling you. i'll never finish if you keep on
interrupting."
"sorry, bruce," said robin, and sat down again.
but he began to play restlessly with his cigarette case which he had
drawn from his pocket.
"well, of course," bruce resumed, "i wasn't much of a private secretary
really, and one day i forgot all about this injunction. some days old
h.p. got as many as three hundred letters. i was alone at harkings with
him, i remember, jeekes was up at sheffield and the other secretaries
were away ill or something, and in the rush of dealing with this
enormous mail i slit one of these blue envelopes open with the rest. i
discovered what i had done only after i had got all the letters sorted
out, this one with the rest. so i went straight to old h.p. and told
him. by jove!"
"what happened?" said robin.
"he got into the most paralytic rage," said bruce. "i have never seen a
man in such an absolute frenzy of passion. he went right off the hooks,
just like that! he fairly put the wind up me. for a minute i thought he
was going to kill me. he snatched the letter out of my hand, called me
every name under the sun, and finally shouted: 'you're fired, d'ye hear?
i won't employ men who disobey my orders! get out of this before i do
you a mischief! i went straight off. and i never saw him again ..."
robin greve looked very serious. but his face displayed no emotion as he
asked:
"and what was in the letter for him to make such a fuss about?"
the boy shrugged his shoulders.
"that was the extraordinary part of it. the letter was perfectly
harmless. it was an ordinary business letter from a firm in holland ..."
"in holland?" cried greve. "did you say in holland? tell me the name!
no, wait, see if i can remember. 'van' something--'speck' or 'spike' ..."
"i remember the name perfectly," answered bruce, rather puzzled by the
other's sudden outburst; "it was van der spyck and co. of rotterdam. we
had a good deal of correspondence with them ..."
robin greve had opened his cigarette-case and drawn from it a creased
square of blue paper folded twice across. unfolding it, he held up the
sheet he had found in the library at harkings.
"is that the paper those letters were written on?" he asked.
bruce took the sheet from him. he held it up to the light.
"why, yes," came the prompt answer. "i'd know it in a minute. look, it's
the same water-mark. 'egmont.' where did you get hold of it?"
"bruce," said robin gravely, without answering the question, "we're
getting into deep water, boy!"
chapter xv
shadows
robert greve stood for an instant in silence by the window of his rooms.
his fingers hammered out a tattoo on the pane. his eyes were fixed on
the windows of the chambers across the court. but they did not take in
the pleasant prospect of the tall, ivy-framed casements in their mellow
setting of warm red brick. he was trying to fix a mental photograph of a
letter--typewritten on paper of dark slatey blue--which he had seen on
hartley parrish's desk in the library at harkings on the previous
afternoon.
prompted by bruce wright, he could now recall the heading clearly.
"elias van der spyck & co., general importers, rotterdam," stood printed
before his eyes as plainly as though he still held the typewritten sheet
in front of him. but the mind plays curious tricks. robin's brain had
registered the name; yet it recorded no impression of the contents of
the letter. beyond the fact that it dealt in plain commercial fashion
with some shipments or other, he could recall no particular whatever of
it.
"but where did you get hold of this sheet of paper?" bruce wright's
voice broke in impatiently behind him. "i'm most frightfully interested
to know ..."
"found it on the floor beside parrish's body," answered robin briefly.
"there was a letter, too, on the same paper ..."
"by gad!" exclaimed the boy eagerly, "have you got that too?"
robin shook his head.
"it was only your story that made me think of it. i had the letter. but
i left it where i found it--on parrish's desk in the library ..."
"but you read it ... you know what was in it?"
robin shrugged his shoulders.
"it was a perfectly straightforward business letter ... something about
steel shipments ... i don't remember any more ..."
"a straightforward business letter," commented the boy. "like the letter
i read, eh?..."
"tell me, bruce," said robin, after a moment's silence, "during the time
you were with hartley parrish, i suppose these blue letters came pretty
often?"
young wright wrinkled his brow in thought.
"it's rather difficult to say. you see, there were three of us besides
old jeekes, and, of course, these letters might have come without my
knowledge anything about it. but during the seven months i worked with
h.p. i suppose about half a dozen of these letters passed through my
hands. they used to worry h.p., you know, robin ..."
"worry him?" exclaimed robin sharply; "how do you mean?"
"well," said bruce, "parrish was a very easygoing fellow, you know. he
worked every one--himself included--like the devil, of course. but he
was hardly ever nervy or grumpy. and so i was a bit surprised to
find--after i had been with him for a time--that every now and then he
sort of shrivelled up. he used to look ... well, careworn and ... and
haggard. and at these times he was pretty short with all of us. it was
such an extraordinary change from his usual cheery, optimistic self that
sometimes i suspected him of dope or some horror like that ..."
robin shook his head. he had a sudden vision of hartley parrish, one of
his long, black partagas thrust at an aggressive angle from a corner of
his mouth, virile, battling, strong.
"oh, no," he said, "not dope ..."
"no, no, i know," the boy went on quickly. "it wasn't dope. it was
fear ..."
robin swung round from the window.
"fear? fear of what?"
the boy cast a frightened glance over his shoulder rather as if he
fancied he might be overheard.
"of those letters," he replied. "i am sure it was that. i watched him
and ... and i _know_. every time he got one of those letters in the
bluish envelopes, these curious fits of gloom came over him. robin ..."
"what, bruce?"
"i think he was being blackmailed!"
the barrister nodded thoughtfully.
"don't you agree?"
the boy awaited his answer eagerly.
"something very like that," replied the other.
then suddenly he smashed his fist into the open palm of his other hand.
"but he wouldn't have taken it lying down!" he cried. "hartley parrish
was a fighter, bruce. did you ever know a man who could best him? no,
no, it won't fit! besides ..."
he broke off and thought for an instant.
"we must get that letter from harkings," he said presently. "jeekes will
have it. we can do nothing until ..."
his voice died away. bruce, sunk in one of the big leather armchairs,
was astonished to see him slip quickly away from the window and ensconce
himself behind one of the chintz curtains.
"here, bruce," robin called softly across the room. "just come here.
but take care not to show yourself. look out, keep behind the curtain
and here ... peep out through this chink!"
young wright peered through a narrow slit between the curtain and the
window-frame. in the far corner of the courtyard beneath the windows,
where a short round iron post marked a narrow passage leading to the
adjoining court, a man was standing. he wore a shabby suit and a blue
handkerchief knotted about his neck served him as a substitute for the
more conventional collar and tie. his body was more than half concealed
by the side of the house along which the passage ran. but his face was
clearly distinguishable--a peaky, thin face, the upper part in the
shadow of the peak of a discoloured tweed cap.
"he's been there on and off all the time we've been talking," said
robin. "i wasn't sure at first. but now i'm certain. he's watching these
windows! look!"
briskly the watcher's head was withdrawn to emerge again, slowly and
cautiously, in a little while.
"but who is he? what does he want?" asked bruce.
"i haven't an idea," retorted robin greve. "but i could guess. tell me,
bruce," he went on, stepping back from the window and motioning the boy
to do the same, "did you notice anybody following you when you came
here?"
bruce shook his head.
"i'm pretty sure nobody did. you see, i came in from the strand, down
middle temple lane. once service has started at temple church there's
not a mouse stirring in the inn till the church is out. i think i should
have noticed if any one had followed me up to your chambers ..."
robin set his chin squarely.
"then he came after me," he said. "bruce, you'll have to go to harkings
and get that letter!"
"by all means," answered the boy. "but, i say, they won't much like me
butting in, will they?"
"you'll have to say you came down to offer your sympathy, ... volunteer
your services ... oh, anything. but you _must_ get that letter! do you
understand, bruce? _you must get that letter_--if you have to steal
it!"
the boy gave a long whistle.
"that's rather a tall order, isn't it?" he said.
robin nodded. his face was very grave.
"yes," he said presently, "i suppose it is. but there is something ...
something horrible behind this case, bruce, something dark and ... and
mysterious. and i mean to get to the bottom of it. with your help. or
alone!"
bruce put his hand impulsively on the other's arm.
"you can count on me, you know," he said. "but don't you think ..."
he broke off shyly.
"what?"
"don't you think you'd better tell me what you know. and what you
suspect!"
robin hesitated.
"yes," he said, "that's fair. i suppose i ought. but there's not much to
tell, bruce. just before hartley parrish was found dead, i asked miss
trevert to marry me. i was too late. she was already engaged to hartley
parrish. i was horrified ... i know some things about parrish ... we had
words and i went off. five minutes later miss trevert went to fetch
parrish in to tea and heard a shot behind the locked door of the
library. horace trevert got in through the window and found parrish
dead. every one down at harkings believes that i went in and threatened
parrish so that he committed suicide ..."
"whom do you mean by every one?"
robin laughed drily. "mary trevert, her mother, horace trevert ..."
"the police, too?"
"certainly. the police more than anybody!"
"by jove!" commented the boy.
"you ask me what i suspect," robin continued. "i admit i have no
positive proof. but i suspect that hartley parrish did not die by his
own hand!"
bruce wright looked up with a startled expression on his face.
"you mean that he was murdered?"
"i do!"
"but how? why?"
then robin told him of the experiment in the library, of the open window
and of the bullet mark he had discovered in the rosery.
"what i want to know," he said, "and what i am determined to find out
beyond any possible doubt, is whether the bullet found in hartley
parrish's body was fired from _his_ pistol. but before we reach that
point we have to explain how it happened that only one shot was heard
and how a bullet which _apparently_ came from parrish's pistol was found
in his body ..."
"if mr. parrish was murdered, the murderer might have turned the gun
round in parrish's hand and forced him to shoot himself ..."
"hardly," said robin. "remember, mary trevert was at the door when the
shot was fired. your theory presupposes the employment of force, in
other words, a struggle. miss trevert heard no scuffling. no, i've
thought of that.. it won't do ..."
"have you any suspicion of who the murderer might be?"
robin shook his head decidedly.
"not a shadow of an idea," he affirmed positively. "but i have a notion
that we shall find a clue in this letter which, like a blithering fool,
i left on parrish's desk. it's the first glimmer of hope i've seen yet ..."
bruce wright squared his shoulders and threw his head back.
"i'll get it for you," he said.
"good boy," said robin. "but, bruce," he went on, "you'll have to go
carefully. my name is mud in that house. you mustn't say you come from
me. and if you ask boldly for the letter, they won't give it to you.
jeekes might, if he's there and you approach him cautiously. but, for
heaven's sake, don't try any diplomacy on manderton ... that's the
scotland yard man. he's as wary as a fox and sharp as needles."
bruce wright buttoned up his coat with an air of finality.
"leave it to me," he said, "i know harkings like my pocket. besides i've
got a friend there ..."
"who might that be?" queried the barrister.
"bude," answered the boy and laid a finger on his lips.
"but," he pursued, jerking his head in the direction of the window,
"what are we going to do about him out there?"
robin laughed.
"him?" he said. "oh, i'm going to take him out for an airing!"
robin stepped out into the hall. he returned wearing his hat and
overcoat. in his hand were two yale keys strung on a wisp of pink tape.
"listen, bruce," he said. "give me ten minutes' start to get rid of this
jackal. then clear out. there's a train to stevenish at 3.23. if you get
on the underground at the temple you ought to be able to make it easily.
here are the keys of the chambers. i can put you up here to-night if you
like. i'll expect you when i see you ... with that letter. savvy?"
the boy stood up.
"you'll have that letter to-night," he answered. "but in the
meantime,"--he waved the blue sheet with its mysterious slots at
robin,--"what do you make of this?"
robin took the sheet of paper from him and replaced it in his
cigarette-case.
"perhaps, when we have the letter," he replied, "i shall be able to
answer that question!"
then he lit a cigarette, gave the boy his hand, and a minute later bruce
wright, watching through the chink of the curtain from the window of
robin greve's chambers, saw a lanky form shuffle across the court and
follow robin round the angle of the house.
robin strode quickly through the maze of narrow passages and tranquil,
echoing courts into the sabbath stillness of the strand. an occasional
halt at a shop-window was sufficient to assure him that the watcher of
the temple was still on his heels. the man, he was interested to see,
played his part very unobtrusively, shambling along in nonchalant
fashion, mostly hugging the sides of the houses, ready to dart out of
sight into a doorway or down a side turning, should he by any mischance
arrive too close on the heels of his quarry.
as he walked along, robin turned over in his mind the best means for
getting rid of his shadow. should he dive into a tube station and plunge
headlong down the steps? he rejected this idea as calculated to let the
tracker know that his presence was suspected. then he reviewed in his
mind the various establishments he knew of in london with double
entrances, thinking that he might slip in by the one entrance and
emerge by the other.
in pall mall he came upon tony grandell, whom he had last seen playing
bridge in the company dugout on the flesquieres ridge. then he had been
in "battle order," camouflaged as a private soldier, as officers were
ordered to go over the top in the latter phases of the war. now he was
resplendent in what the invitation cards call "morning dress" crowned by
what must certainly have been the most relucent top-hat in london.
"hullo, hullo, hullo!" cried tony, on catching sight of him; "stand to
your kits and so forth! and how is my merry company commander? robin,
dear, come and relieve the medieval gloom of lunch with my aunt at
mart's!"
he linked his arm affectionately in robin's.
mart's! robin's brain snatched at the word. mart's! most respectable of
"family hotels," wedged in between two quiet streets off piccadilly with
an entrance from both. if ever a man wanted to dodge a sleuth,
especially a grimy tatterdemalion like the one sidling up pall mall
behind them ...
"tony, old son," said robin, "i won't lunch with you even to set the
board in a roar at your aunt's luncheon-party. but i'll walk up to
mart's with you, for i'm going there myself ..."
they entered mart's together and parted in the vestibule, where tony
gravely informed his "dear old scream" that he must fly to his
"avuncular luncheon." robin walked quickly through the hotel and left by
the other entrance. the street was almost deserted. of the man with the
dingy neckerchief there was no sign. robin hurried into piccadilly and
hopped on a 'bus which put him down at his club facing the green park.
he had a late lunch there and afterwards took a taxi back to the temple.
the daylight was failing as he crossed the courtyard in front of his
chambers. in the centre the smoke-blackened plane-tree throned it in
unchallenged solitude. but, as robin's footsteps echoed across the
flags, something more substantial than a shadow seemed to melt into the
gathering dusk in the corner where the narrow passage ran.
robin stopped to listen at the entrance to his chambers. as he stood
there he heard a heavy tread on the stone steps within. he turned to
face a solidly built swarthy-looking man who emerged from the building.
he favoured robin with a leisurely, searching stare, then strode heavily
across the courtyard to the little passage where he disappeared from
view.
robin looked after him. the man was a stranger: the occupants of the
other chambers were all known to him. with a thoughtful expression on
his face robin entered the house and mounted to his rooms.
chapter xvi
the intruder
"d----!" exclaimed bruce wright.
he stood in the great porch at harkings, his finger on the electric
bell. no sound came in response to the pressure, nor any one to open the
door. thus he had stood for fully ten minutes listening in vain for any
sound within the house. all was still as death. he began to think that
the bell was out of order. he had forgotten hartley parrish's insistence
on quiet. all bells at harkings rang, discreetly muted, in the servants'
hall.
he stepped out of the porch on to the drive. the weather had improved
and, under a freshening wind, the country was drying up. as he reached
the hard gravel, he heard footsteps, bude appeared, his collar turned
up, his swallow-tails floating in the wind.
"now, be off with you!" he cried as soon as he caught sight of the trim
figure in the grey overcoat; "how many more of ye have i to tell there's
nothing for you to get here! go on, get out before i put the dog on
you!"
he waved an imperious hand at bruce.
"hullo, bude," said the boy, "you've grown very inhospitable all of a
sudden!"
"god bless my soul if it isn't young mr. wright!" exclaimed the butler.
"and i thought it was another of those dratted reporters. it's been
ring, ring, ring the whole blessed morning, sir, you can believe me, as
if they owned the place, wanting to interview me and mr. jeekes and miss
trevert and the lord knows who else. lot of interfering busybodies, _i_
call 'em! i'd shut up all noospapers by law if i had my way ..."
"is mr. jeekes here, bude?" asked bruce.
"he's gone off to london in the car, sir ... but won't you come in, mr.
wright? if you wouldn't mind coming in by the side door. i have to keep
the front door closed to shut them scribbling fellows out. one of them
had the face to ask me to let him into the library to take a
photograph ..."
he led the way round the side of the house to the glass door in the
library corridor.
"this is a sad business, bude!" said bruce.
"ah, indeed, it is, sir," he sighed. "he had his faults had mr. parrish,
as well _you_ know, mr. wright. but he was an open-handed gentleman,
that i will say, and we'll all miss him at harkings ..."
they were now in the corridor. bude jerked a thumb over his shoulder.
"it was in there they found him," he said in a low voice, "with a hole
plumb over the heart."
his voice sank to a whisper. "there's blood on the carpet!" he added
impressively.
"i should like just to take a peep at the room, bude," ventured the boy,
casting a sidelong glance at the butler.
"can't be done, sir," said bude, shaking his head; "orders of
detective-inspector manderton. the police is very strict, mr. wright,
sir!"
"there seems to be no one around just now, bude," the young man
wheedled. "there can't be any harm in my just going in for a second?..."
"go in you should, mr. wright, sir," said the butler genially, "if i had
my way. but the door's locked. and, what's more, the police have the
key."
"is the detective anywhere about?" asked bruce.
"no, sir," answered bude. "he's gone off to town, too! and he don't
expect to be back before the inquest. that's for toosday!"
"but isn't there another key anywhere?" persisted the boy.
"no, sir," said bude positively, "there isn't but the one. and that's
in mr. manderton's vest pocket!"
young wright wrinkled his brow in perplexity. he was very young, but he
had a fine strain of perseverance in him. he was not nearly at the end
of his resources, he told himself.
"well, then," he said suddenly, "i'm going outside to have a look
through the window. i remember you can see into the library from the
path round the house!"
he darted out, the butler, protesting, lumbering along behind him.
"mr. wright," he panted as he ran, "you didn't reelly ought ... if any
one should come ..."
but bruce wright was already at the window. the butler found him leaning
on the sill, peering with an air of frightened curiosity into the empty
room.
"the glazier from stevenish"--bude's voice breathed the words hoarsely
in wright's ear--"is coming to-morrow morning to put the window in. he
wouldn't come to-day, him being a chapel-goer and religious. it was
there we found poor mr. parrish--d'you see, sir, just between the window
and the desk!"
but bruce wright did not heed him. his eyes were fixed on the big
writing-desk, on the line of black japanned letter-trays set out in
orderly array. outside, the short winter afternoon was drawing in fast,
and the light was failing. dusky shadows within the library made it
difficult to distinguish objects clearly.
a voice close at hand cried out sharply:
"mr. bude! mr. bu-u-ude!"
"they're calling me!" whispered the butler in his ear with a tug at his
sleeve; "come away, sir!"
but bruce shook him off. he heard the man's heavy tread on the gravel,
then a door slam.
how dark the room was growing, to be sure! strain his eyes as he might,
he could not get a clear view of the contents of the letter-trays on the
desk. but their high backs hid their contents from his eyes. even when
he hoisted himself on to the window-sill he could not get a better view.
he dropped back on to the gravel path and listened. the wind soughed
sadly in the bare tree-tops, somewhere in the distance a dog barked
hoarsely, insistently; otherwise not a sound was to be heard. he cast a
cautious glance round the side of the house. the glass door was shut;
the lamp in the corridor had not been lit.
hoisting himself up to the window-sill again, he crooked one knee on the
rough edge and thrusting one arm through the broken pane of glass,
unbolted the window. then, steadying himself with one hand, with the
other he very gently pushed up the window, threw his legs across the
sill, and dropped into the library. very deliberately, he turned and
pushed the window softly down behind him.
some unconscious prompting, perhaps an unfamiliar surface beneath his
feet, made him look down. where his feet rested on the mole-grey carpet
a wide dark patch stood out from the delicate shade of the rug. for a
moment a spasm of physical nausea caught him.
"how beastly!" he whispered to himself and took a step towards the desk.
hartley parrish's desk was arranged just as he always remembered it to
have been. all the letter-trays save one were empty. in that was a
little pile of papers held down by a massive marble paper-weight.
quickly he stepped round the desk.
he had put out his hand to lift the weight when there was a gentle
rattle at the door.
bruce wright wheeled instantly round, back to the desk, to face the
door, which, in the gathering dusk, was now but a squarer patch of
darkness among the shadows at the far end of the library. he stood
absolutely still, rooted to the spot, his heart thumping so fast that,
in that silent room, he could hear the rapid beats.
some one was unlocking the library door. as realization came to the
boy, he tiptoed rapidly round the desk, the sound of his feet muffled by
the heavy pile carpet, and reached the window. there was a click as the
lock of the door was shot back. without further hesitation bruce stepped
behind the long curtains which fell from the top of the window to the
floor.
the curtains, of some heavy grey material, were quite opaque. bruce
realized, with a sinking heart, that he must depend on his ears to
discover the identity of this mysterious interloper. he dared not look
out from his hiding-place--at least not until he could be sure that the
newcomer had his back to the window. he remained, rigid and vigilant,
straining his ears to catch the slightest sound, scarcely daring to
breathe.
he heard the door open, heard it softly close again. then ... silence.
not another sound. the boy remembered the heavy pile carpet and cursed
his luck. he would have to risk a peep round the curtains. but not yet!
he must wait ...
a very slight rustling, a faint prolonged rustling, caught his ear. it
came nearer, then stopped. there was a little rattling noise from
somewhere close at hand, a small clinking sound.
then silence fell again.
the wind whooshed sadly round the house, the window clattered dismally
in its frame, the curtains tugged fretfully before the cold breeze which
blew in at the broken pane. but the silence in the room was absolute.
it began to oppress the boy. it frightened him. he felt an
uncontrollable desire to look out into the room and establish the
identity of the mysterious entrant. he glided his hand towards the
window-frame in the hope that he might find a chink between curtain and
wall through which he might risk a peep into the room. but the curtain
was fastened to the wall.
the room was almost entirely dark now. only behind him was a patch of
grey light where the lowering evening sky was framed in the window. he
began to draw the curtain very slowly towards him, at the same time
leaning to the right. very cautiously he applied one eye to the edge of
the curtain.
as he did so a bright light struck him full in the face. it streamed
full from a lamp on the desk and almost blinded him. it was a
reading-lamp and the bulb had been turned up so as to throw a beam on
the curtain behind which the boy was sheltering.
behind the desk, straining back in terror, stood a slim, girlish figure.
the details of her dress were lost in the gathering shadows, but her
face stood out in the gloom, a pale oval. bruce could see the dark line
made by the lashes on her cheek.
at the sight of her, he stepped boldly forth from his hiding-place,
shielding his eyes from the light with his hand.
"it's bruce wright, miss trevert," he said, "don't you remember me?"
chapter xvii
a fresh clue
"oh!" cried the girl, "you frightened me! you frightened me! what do you
want here ... in this horrible room?"
she was trembling. one slim hand plucked nervously at her dress. her
breath came and went quickly.
"i saw the curtain move. i thought it was the wind at first. but then i
saw the outline of your fingers. and i imagined it was he ... come
back ..."
"miss trevert," said the boy abashed, "i must have frightened you
terribly. i had no idea it was you!"
"but why are you hiding here? how did you get in? what do you want in
this house?"
she spoke quickly, nervously. some papers she held in her hand shook
with her emotion. bruce wright stepped to the desk and turned the bulb
of the reading-lamp down into its normal position.
"i must apologize most sincerely for the fright i gave you," he said.
"but, believe me, miss trevert, i had no idea that anybody could gain
access to this room. i climbed in through the window. bude told me that
the police had taken away the key ..."
the girl made an impatient gesture.
"but why have you come here?" she said. "what do you want?"
the boy measured her with a narrow glance. he was young, but he was
shrewd. he saw her frank eyes, her candid, open mien, and he took a
rapid decision.
"i think i have come," he answered slowly, "for the same purpose as
yourself!"
and he looked at the papers in her hand.
"i used to be mr. parrish's secretary, you know," he said.
the girl sighed--a little fluttering sigh--and looked earnestly at him.
"i remember," she said. "hartley liked you. he was sorry that he sent
you away. he often spoke of you to me. but why have you come back? what
do you mean by saying you have come for the same purpose as myself?"
bruce wright looked at the array of letter-trays. the marble
paper-weight had been displaced. the tray in which it had lain was
empty. he looked at the sheaf of papers in the girl's hand.
"i wanted to see," he replied, "whether there was anything here ... on
his desk ... which would explain the mystery of his death ..."
the girl spread out the papers in her hand on the big blotter.
she laid the papers out in a row and leant forward, her white arms
resting on the desk. from the other side of the desk the boy leant
eagerly forward and scanned the line of papers.
at the first glimpse his face fell. the girl, eyeing him closely, marked
the change which came over his features.
there were seven papers of various kinds, both printed and written, and
they were all on white paper.
the boy shook his head and swept the papers together into a heap.
"it's not there?" queried the girl eagerly.
"no!" said bruce absent-mindedly, glancing round the desk.
"what isn't?" flashed back the girl.
bruce wright felt his face redden with vexation. what sort of a
confidential emissary was he to fall into a simple trap like this?
the girl smiled rather wanly.
"now i know what you meant by saying you had come for the same purpose
as myself," she said. "i suppose we both thought we might find
something, a letter, perhaps, which would explain why mr. parrish did
this dreadful thing, something to relieve this awful uncertainty about ...
about his motive. well, i've searched the desk ... and there's
nothing! nothing but just these prospectuses and receipts which were in
the letter-tray here. they must have come by the post yesterday morning.
and there's nothing of any importance in the drawers ... only household
receipts and the wages book and a few odd things like that! you can see
for yourself ..."
the lower part of the desk consisted of three drawers flanked on either
side by cupboards. mary trevert pulled out the drawers and opened the
cupboards. two of the drawers were entirely empty and one of the
cupboards contained nothing but a stack of cigar boxes. one drawer held
various papers appertaining to the house. there was no sign of any
letter written on the slatey-blue paper.
the boy looked very hard at mary.
"you say there was nothing in the letter-tray but these papers here?" he
asked.
"nothing but these," replied the girl.
"you didn't notice any official-looking letter on bluish paper?" he
ventured to ask.
"no," answered the girl. "i found nothing but these."
the boy thought for a moment.
"do you know," he asked, "whether the police or anybody have been
through the desk?"
"i don't know at all," said mary, smoothing back a lock of hair from her
temple; "i daresay mr. jeekes had a look round, as he had a meeting with
mr. parrish's lawyer in town this afternoon!"
she had lost all trace of her fright and was now quite calm and
collected.
"do you know for certain whether mr. jeekes was in here?" asked bruce.
"oh, yes. the first thing he did on arriving last night was to go to the
library."
"i suppose jeekes is coming back here to-night?"
no, she told him. mr. jeekes did not expect to return to harkings until
the inquest on tuesday.
bruce wright picked up his hat.
"i must apologize again, miss trevert," he said, "for making such an
unconventional entrance and giving you such a fright. but i felt i could
not rest until i had investigated matters for myself. i would have
presented myself in the ordinary way, but, as i told you, bude told me
the police had locked up the room and taken away the key ..."
mary trevert smiled forgivingly.
"so they did," she said. "but jay--mr. parrish's man, you know--had
another key. he brought it to me."
she looked at bruce with a whimsical little smile.
"you must have been very uncomfortable behind those curtains," she said.
"i believe you were just as frightened as i was."
she walked round the desk to the window.
"it was a good hiding-place," she remarked, "but not much good as an
observation post. why! you could see nothing of the room. the curtains
are much too thick!"
"not a thing," bruce agreed rather ruefully. "i thought you were the
detective!"
he held out his hand to take his leave with a smile. he was a
charming-looking boy with a remarkably serene expression which went well
with close-cropped golden hair.
mary trevert did not take his hand for an instant. looking down at the
point of her small black suede shoe she said shyly:
"mr. wright, you are a friend of mr. greve, aren't you?"
"rather!" was the enthusiastic answer.
"do you see him often?"
the boy's eyes narrowed suddenly. was this a cross-examination?
"oh, yes," he replied, "every now and then!"
mary trevert raised her eyes to his.
"will you do something for me?" she said. "tell mr. greve not to trust
manderton. he will know whom i mean. tell him to be on his guard against
that man. say he means mischief. tell him, above all things, to be
careful. make him go away ... go abroad until this thing has blown
over ..."
she spoke with intense earnestness, her dark eyes fixed on bruce
wright's face.
"but promise me you won't say this comes from me! do you understand?
there are reasons, very strong reasons, for this. will you promise?"
"of course!"
she took bruce's outstretched hand.
"i promise," he said.
"you mustn't go without tea," said the girl. "besides,"--she glanced at
a little platinum watch on her wrist,--"there's not another train until
six. there is no need for you to start yet. i don't like being left
alone. mother has one of her headaches, and horace and dr. romain have
gone to stevenish. come up to my sitting-room!"
she led the way out of the library, locking the door behind them, and
together they went up to the chinese boudoir where tea was laid on a low
table before a bright fire. in the dainty room with its bright colours
they seemed far removed from the tragedy which had darkened harkings.
they had finished tea when a tap came at the door. bude appeared. he
cast a reproachful look at bruce.
"jay would be glad to have a word with you, miss," he said.
the girl excused herself and left the room. she was absent for about ten
minutes. when she returned, she had a little furrow of perplexity
between her brows. she walked over to the open fireplace and stood
silent for an instant, her foot tapping the hearth-rug.
"mr. wright," she said presently, "i'm going to tell you something that
jay has just told me. i want your advice ..."
the boy looked at her interrogatively. but he did not speak.
"i think this is rather important," the girl went on, "but i don't quite
understand in what way it is. jay tells me that mr. parrish had on his
pistol a sort of steel fitting attached to the end ... you know, the
part you shoot out of. mr. parrish used to keep his automatic in a
drawer in his dressing-room, and jay has often seen it there with this
attachment fitted on. well, when mr. parrish was discovered in the
library yesterday, this thing was no longer on the pistol. and jay says
it's not to be found!..."
"that's rather strange!" commented bruce. "but what was this steel
contraption for, do you know? was it a patent sight or something?"
"jay doesn't know," answered the girl.
"would you mind if i spoke to jay myself?" asked the young man.
in reply the girl touched the bell beside the fireplace. bude answered
the summons and was despatched to find jay. he appeared in due course, a
tall, dark, sleek young man wearing a swallow-tail coat and striped
trousers.
"how are you, jay?" said bruce affably.
"very well, thank you, sir," replied the valet.
"miss trevert was telling me about this appliance which you say mr.
parrish had on his automatic. could you describe it to me?"
"well, sir," answered the man rather haltingly, "it was a little sort of
cup made of steel or gun-metal fitting closely over the barrel ..."
"and you don't know what it was for?"
"no, sir!"
"was it a sight, do you think?"
"i can't say, i'm sure, sir!"
"you know what a sight looks like, i suppose. was there a bead on it or
anything like it?"
"i can't say, i'm sure, sir. i never gave any particular heed to it. i
used to see the automatic lying in the drawer of the wardrobe in mr.
parrish's room in a wash-leather case. i noticed this steel appliance,
sir, because the case wouldn't shut over the pistol with it on and the
butt used to stick out."
"when did you last notice mr. parrish's automatic?"
"it would be thursday or friday, sir. i went to that drawer to get mr.
parrish an old stock to go riding in as some new ones he had bought were
stiff and hurt him."
"and this steel cup was on the pistol then?"
"oh, yes, sir!"
"and you say it was not on the pistol when mr. parrish's body was
found?"
"no, sir!"
"are you sure of this?"
"yes, sir. i was one of the first in the room, and i saw the pistol in
mr. parrish's hand, and there was no sign of the cup, sir. so i've had a
good look among his things and i can't find it anywhere!"
bruce wright pondered a minute.
"try and think, jay," he said, "if you can't remember anything more
about this steel cup, as you call it. where did mr. parrish buy it?"
"can't say, i'm sure, sir. he had it before ever i took service with
him!"
jay put his hand to his forehead for an instant.
"now i come to think of it," he said, "there was the name of the shop or
maker on it, stamped on the steel. 'maxim,' that was the name, now i put
my mind back, with a number ..."
"maxim?" echoed bruce wright. "did you say maxim?"
"yes, sir! that was the name!" replied the valet impassively.
"by jove!" said the boy half to himself. then he said aloud to jay:
"did you tell the police about this?"
jay looked somewhat uncomfortable.
"no, sir."
"why not?"
jay looked at mary trevert.
"well, sir, i thought perhaps i'd better tell miss trevert first. bude
thought so, too. that there manderton has made so much unpleasantness in
the house with his prying ways that i said to myself, sir ..."
bruce wright looked at mary.
"would you mind if i asked jay not to say anything about this to anybody
just for the present?" he asked.
"you hear what mr. wright says, jay," said mary. "i don't want you to
say anything about this matter just yet. do you understand?"
"yes, miss. will that be all, miss?"
"yes, thank you, jay!"
"thanks very much, jay," said the boy. "this may be important. mum's the
word, though!"
"i _quite_ understand, sir," answered the valet and left the room.
hardly had the door closed on him than the girl turned eagerly to bruce.
"it _is_ important?" she asked.
"it may be," was the guarded reply.
"don't leave me in the dark like this," the girl pleaded. "this horrible
affair goes on growing and growing, and at every step it seems more
bewildering ... more ghastly. tell me where it is leading, mr. wright! i
can't stand the suspense much more!"
her voice broke, and she turned her face away.
"you must be brave, miss trevert," said the boy, putting his hand on her
shoulder. "don't ask me to tell you more now. your friends are working
to get at the truth ..."
"the truth!" cried the girl. "god knows where the truth will lead us!"
bruce wright hesitated a moment.
"i don't think you have any need to fear the truth!" he said presently.
the girl took her handkerchief from her face and looked at him with
brimming eyes.
"you know more than you let me think you did," she said brokenly. "but
you are a friend of mine, aren't you?"
"yes," said bruce, and added boldly:
"and of his too!"
she did not speak again, but gave him her hand. he clasped it and went
out hurriedly to catch his train back to london.
chapter xviii
the silent shot
that faithful servitor of fleet street, the law courts clock, had just
finished striking seven. it boomed out the hour, stroke by stroke,
solemnly, inexorably, like a grim old judge summing up and driving home,
point by point, an irrefutable charge. the heavy strokes broke in upon
the fitful doze into which robin greve, stretched out in an armchair in
his living-room, had dropped.
he roused up with a start. there was the click of a key in the lock of
his front door. bruce wright burst into the room.
the boy shut the door quickly and locked it. he was rather pale and
seemed perturbed. on seeing robin he jerked his head in the direction of
the courtyard.
"i suppose you know they're still outside?" he said.
robin nodded nonchalantly.
"there are three of them now," the boy went on. "robin, i don't like it.
something's going to happen. you'll want to mind yourself ... if it's
not too late already!"
he stepped across to the window and bending down, peered cautiously
round the curtain.
robin greve laughed.
"bah!" he said, "they can't touch me!"
"you're wrong," bruce retorted without changing his position. "they can
and they will. don't think manderton is a fool, robin. he means
mischief ..."
robin raised his eyebrows.
"does he?" he said. "now i wonder who told you that ..."
"friends of yours at harkings asked me to warn you ..." began bruce
awkwardly.
"my friends are scarcely in the majority there," retorted robin. "whom
do you mean exactly?"
but the boy ignored the question.
"three men watching the house!" he exclaimed; "don't you think that
_this_ looks as though manderton meant business?"
he returned to his post of observation at the curtain.
robin laughed cynically.
"manderton doesn't worry me any," he said cheerfully. "the man's the
victim of an _idee fixe_. he believes parrish killed himself just as
firmly as he believes that i frightened or bullied parrish into doing
it ..."
"don't be too sure about that, robin," said the boy, dropping the
curtain and coming back to robin's chair. "he may want you to think
that. but how can we tell how much he knows?"
robin flicked the ash off his cigarette disdainfully.
"these promoted policemen make me tired," he said.
bruce wright shook his head quickly with a little gesture of
exasperation.
"you don't understand," he said. "there's fresh evidence ..."
robin greve looked up with real interest in his eyes. his bantering
manner had vanished.
"you've got that letter?" he asked eagerly.
bruce shook his head.
"no, not that," he said. then leaning forward he added in a low voice:
"have you ever heard of the maxim silencer?"
"i believe i have, vaguely," replied robin. "isn't it something to do
with a motor engine?"
"no," said bruce. "it's an extraordinary invention which absolutely
suppresses the noise of the discharge of a gun."
robin shot a quick glance at the speaker.
"go on," he said.
"it's a marvelous thing, really," the boy continued, warming to his
theme. "a man at havre had one when i was at the base there, during the
war. it's a little cup-shaped steel fitting that goes over the barrel.
you can fire a rifle fitted with one of these silencers in a small room
and it makes no more noise than a fairly loud sneeze ..."
"ah!"
robin was listening intently now.
"parrish had a maxim silencer," bruce went on impressively.
"_parrish_ had?"
"it was fitted on his automatic pistol, the one he had in his hand when
they found him ..."
"there was no attachment of any kind on the gun parrish was holding when
he was discovered yesterday afternoon," declared robin positively; "i
can vouch for that. i was there almost immediately after they found him.
and if there had been anything of the kind horace trevert would
certainly have mentioned it ..."
"i know. jay, who came in soon after you, was surprised to see that the
silencer was not on the pistol. and he made a point of looking for it ..."
"but how do you know that parrish had it on the pistol?..."
"well, we don't know for certain. but we do know that it was permanently
fitted to his automatic. jay has often seen it. and if parrish did
remove it, he didn't leave it lying around any where. jay has looked
all through his things without finding it ..."
"when did jay see it last?"
"on thursday!"
"but are you sure that this is the same pistol as the one which jay has
been in the habit of seeing?"
"jay is absolutely sure. he says that parrish only had the one automatic
which he always kept in the same drawer in his dressing-room ..."
robin was silent for a moment. very deliberately he filled his pipe, lit
it, and drew until it burned comfortably. then he said slowly:
"this means that hartley parrish was murdered, bruce, old man. all
through i have been puzzling my mind to reconcile the unquestionable
circumstance that two bullets were fired--i told you of the bullet mark
i found on the upright in the rosery--with the undoubted fact that only
one report was heard. we can therefore presume, either that hartley
parrish first fired one shot from his pistol with the silencer fitted
and then removed the silencer and fired another shot without it, thereby
killing himself, or that the second shot was fired by the person whose
interest it was to get rid of the silencer. there is no possible or
plausible reason why parrish should have fired first one shot with the
silencer and then one without. therefore, i find myself irresistibly
compelled to the conclusion that the shot heard by mary trevert was
fired by the person who killed parrish. do i make myself clear?"
"perfectly," answered bruce.
"now, then," the barrister proceeded, thoughtfully puffing at his pipe,
"one weak point about my deductions is that they all hang on the
question as to whether, at the time of the tragedy, parrish actually had
the silencer on his pistol or not. that is really the acid test of
manderton's suicide theory. you said, i think, that a rifle fired with
the silencer attachment makes no more noise than the sound of a loud
sneeze!"
"that's right," agreed bruce; "a sort of harsh, spluttering noise. not
so loud either, robin. ph ... t-t-t! like that!"
"loud enough to be heard through a door, would you say?"
"oh, i think so!"
robin thought intently for a moment.
"then mary is the only one who can put us right on that point. assuming
that two shots were fired--and that bullet mark in the rosery is, i
think, conclusive on that head--and knowing that she heard the loud
report of the one, presumably, if parrish had the silencer on his
automatic, mary must have heard the _muffled_ report of the other. what
it comes to is this, mary heard the shot fired that killed parrish. did
she hear the shot he fired at his murderer?"
"by gad!" exclaimed bruce wright impressively, "i believe you've got it,
robin! parrish fired at somebody at the window--a silent shot--and the
other fellow fired back the shot that mary trevert heard, the shot that
killed parrish. isn't that the way you figure it out?"
"not so fast, young man," remarked robin. "let's first find out whether
mary actually heard the muffled shot and, if so, _when ... before_ or
_after_ the loud report."
he glanced across at the window and then at bruce,
"i suppose this discovery about the silencer is responsible for the
deputation waiting in the courtyard," he said drily.
"the police don't know about it yet," replied bruce; "at least they
didn't when i left."
robin shook his head dubiously.
"if the servants know it, manderton will worm it out of them. hasn't he
cross-examined jay?"
"yes," said bruce. "but he got nothing out of him about this. manderton
seems to have put everybody's back up. he gets nothing out of the
servants ..."
"if parrish had had this silencer for some time, you may be sure that
other people know about it. these silencers must be pretty rare in
england. you see, an average person like myself didn't know what it was.
by the way, another point which we haven't yet cleared up is this:
supposing we are right in believing parrish to have been murdered, how
do you explain the fact that the bullet removed from his body fitted his
pistol?"
"that's a puzzler, i must say!" said bruce.
"there's only one possible explanation, i think," robin went on, "and
that is that parrish was shot by a pistol of exactly the same calibre as
his own. for the murderer to have killed parrish with his own weapon
would have been difficult without a struggle. but miss trevert heard no
struggle. for murderer and his victim to have pistols of the same
calibre argues a rather remarkable coincidence, i grant you. but then
life is full of coincidences! we meet them every day in the law. though,
i admit, this is a coincidence which requires some explaining ..."
he fell into a brown study which bruce interrupted by suddenly
remembering that he had had no lunch.
for answer robin pointed at the sideboard.
"there's a cloth in there," he said, "also the whisky, if my laundress
has left any, and a siphon and there should be some claret--mrs. bragg
doesn't care about red wine. set the table, and i'll take a root round
in the kitchen and dig up some tinned stuff."
they supped off a tinned tongue and some _pate de foie gras_. over their
meal bruce told robin of his adventure in the library at harkings.
"jeekes must have collected that letter," bruce said. "before i came to
you, i went to lincoln's inn fields to see if he was still at
bardy's--parrish's solicitor, you know. but the office was closed, and
the place in darkness. i went on to the junior pantheon, that's jeekes's
club, but he wasn't in. he hadn't been there all day, the porter told me.
so i left a note asking him to ring you up here ..."
"the case reeks of blackmail," said robin thoughtfully, "but i am
wondering how much we shall glean from this precious letter when we do
see it. i am glad you asked jeekes to ring me up, though. he should be
able to tell us something about these mysterious letters on the blue
paper that used to put parrish in such a stew ... hullo, who can that
be?"
an electric bell trilled through the flat. it rang once ... twice ...
and then a third time, a long, insistent peal.
"see who's there, will you, bruce?" said robin.
"suppose it's the police ..." began the boy.
robin shrugged his shoulders.
"you can say i'm at home and ask them in," he said.
he heard the heavy oaken door swing open, a murmur of voices in the
hall. the next moment detective-inspector manderton entered the
sitting-room.
chapter xix
mr. manderton lays his cards on the table
the detective's manner had undergone some subtle change which robin,
watching him closely as he came into the room, was quick to note. mr.
manderton made an effort to retain his old air of rather patronizing
swagger; but he seemed less sure of himself than was his wont. in fact,
he appeared to be a little anxious.
he walked briskly into the sitting-room and looked quickly from bruce to
robin.
"mr. greve," he said, "you can help me if you will by answering a few
questions ..."
with another glance at bruce wright he added:
"... in private."
bruce, obedient to a sign from robin, said he would ring up in the
morning and prepared to take his leave. robin turned to the detective.
"there are some of your men, i believe," he said coldly, "watching this
house. would it be asking too much to request that my friend here might
be permitted to return home unescorted?"
"he needn't worry," replied manderton with a significant smile.
"there's no one outside now!..."
they watched bruce wright pass into the hall and collect his hat and
coat. as the front door slammed behind him, the detective added:
"i took 'em off myself soon after seven o'clock!"
"why?" asked robin bluntly.
mr. manderton dropped his heavy form into a chair.
"i'm a plain man, mr. greve," he said, "and i'm not above owning to it,
i hope, when i'm wrong. for some little time now it has struck me that
our lines of investigation run parallel ..."
"instead of crossing!"
"instead of crossing--exactly!"
"it's a pity you did not grasp that very obvious fact earlier," observed
robin pointedly.
mr. manderton crossed one leg over the other and, his finger-tips
pressed together, looked at robin.
"will you help me?" he asked simply.
"do you want my help?"
mr. manderton nodded.
"allies, then?"
"allies it is!"
robin pointed to the table.
"it's dry work talking," he said. "won't you take a drink?"
"thanks, i don't drink. but i'll have a cigar if i may. thank you!"
the detective helped himself to a cheroot from a box on the table and
lit up. then, affecting to scan the end of his cigar with great
attention, he asked abruptly:
"what do you know of the woman calling herself madame de malpas?"
robin pursed up his lips rather disdainfully.
"one of the late mr. parrish's lady friends," he replied. "i expect you
know that!"
"do you know where she lives?" pursued the detective, ignoring the
implied question.
"she's dead."
a flicker of interest appeared for an instant in mr. manderton's keen
eyes.
"you're sure of that?"
"certainly," answered robin.
"who told you?"
"le hagen--the solicitor, you know. he acted for this malpas woman on
one or two occasions."
"when did she die?"
"six or seven months ago ..."
"did jeekes know about it?"
"jeekes? do you mean parrish's secretary?
"it's funny your asking that. as a matter of fact, it was through jeekes
that i heard the lady was dead. i was in le hagen's office one day when
jeekes came in, and le hagen told me jeekes had come to pay in a cheque
for the cost of the funeral and the transport of the body to france."
"this was six or seven months ago, you say? i take it, then, that any
allowance that parrish was in the habit of making to this woman has
ceased?"
"i tell you the lady is dead!"
"then what would you say if i informed you that mr. jeekes had declared
that these payments were still going on ..."
robin shrugged his shoulders.
"i should say he was lying ..."
"i agree. but why?"
"whom did he tell this to?"
"miss trevert!"
"miss trevert?"
robin repeated the name in amazement.
"i don't understand," he said. "why on earth should jeekes blacken his
employer's character to miss trevert? what conceivable motive could he
have had? did she tell you this?"
"no," said manderton; "i heard him tell her myself."
"do you mean to tell me," protested robin, growing more and more
puzzled, "that jeekes told miss trevert this offensive and deliberate
lie in your presence!"
"well," remarked mr. manderton slowly, "i don't know about his saying
this in my presence exactly. but i heard him tell her for all that.
walls have ears, you know--particularly if the door is ajar!"
he looked shrewdly at robin, then dropped his eyes to the floor.
"he also told her that le hagen and you were in business relations ..."
robin sat up at this.
"ah!" he said shortly. "i see what you're getting at now. our friend has
been trying to set miss trevert against me, eh? but why? i don't even
know this man jeekes except to have nodded 'good-morning' to him a few
times. why on earth should he of all men go out of his way to slander me
to miss trevert, to throw suspicion ..."
he broke off short and looked at the detective.
mr. manderton caressed his big black moustache.
"yes," he repeated suavely, "you were saying 'to cast suspicion' ..."
the eyes of the two men met. then the detective leaned back in his
chair and, blowing a cloud of smoke from his lips, said:
"mr. greve, you've been thinking ahead of me on this case. what you've
told me so far i've checked. and you're right. dead right. and since
you're, in a manner of speaking, one of the parties interested in
getting things cleared up, i'd like you to tell me just simply what idea
you've formed about it ..."
"gladly," answered the barrister. "and to start with let me tell you
that the case stinks of blackmail ..."
"steady on," interposed the detective. "i thought so, too, at first.
i've been into all that. mr. parrish made a clean break with the last of
his lady friends about two months since; and, as far as our
investigations go, there has been no blackmail in connection with any of
his women pals. vine street knows all about master parrish. there were
complaints about some of his little parties up in town. but i don't
believe there's a woman in this case ..."
"i didn't say there was," retorted robin. "the blackmail is probably
being levied from holland. a threat of violence was finally carried into
effect on saturday evening between 5 and 5.15 p.m. by some one
conversant with the lie of the land at harkings. this individual, armed
with an automatic browning of the same calibre as mr. parrish's, shot
at parrish through the open window of the library and killed
him--probably in self-defence, after parrish had had a shot at him ..."
"steady there, whoa!" said mr. manderton in a jocular way clearly
expressive of his incredulity; "there was only one shot ..."
"there were _two_," was robin's dispassionate reply. "though maybe only
one was heard. parrish had a maxim silencer on his gun ..."
mr. manderton was now thoroughly alert.
"how did you find that out?" he asked.
"jay, parrish's man, came forward and volunteered this evidence ..."
"he said nothing about it when i questioned him," grumbled the
detective.
robin laughed.
"you're a terror to the confirmed criminal, they tell me, manderton," he
said, "but you obviously don't understand that complicated mechanism
known as the domestic servant. no servant at harkings will voluntarily
tell _you_ anything ..."
mr. manderton, who had stood up, shook his big frame impatiently.
"explain the rest of your theories," he said harshly. "what's all this
about blackmail being levied from holland?"
then robin greve told him of the letters written on the slatey-blue
paper and of their effect upon parrish, and of the letter headed, "elias
van der spyck & co., general importers, rotterdam," which had lain on
the desk in the library when parrish's dead body had been found.
manderton nodded gloomily.
"it was there right enough," he remarked. "i saw it. a letter about
steel shipments and the dockers' strike, wasn't it? as there seemed
nothing to it, i left it with the other papers for jeekes, the secretary
chap. but what evidence is there that this was blackmail?"
"this," said robin, and showed the detective the sheet of blue paper
with its series of slits. "manderton," he said, "these letters written
on this blue paper were in code, i feel sure. why should not this be the
key? you see it bears a date--'nov. 25.' may it not refer to that
letter? i found it by parrish's body on the carpet in the library. i
would have given it to you at harkings, but i shoved it in my pocket and
forgot all about it until i was in the train coming up to town this
morning."
mr. manderton took the sheet of paper, turned it over, and held it up to
the light. then, without comment, he put it away in the pocket of his
jacket.
"if parrish killed himself," robin went on earnestly, "that letter drove
him to it. if, on the other hand, he was murdered, may not that letter
have contained a warning?"
"i should prefer to suspend judgment until we've seen the letter, mr.
greve," said the detective bluntly. "we must get it from jeekes. in the
meantime, what makes you think that the murderer (to follow up your
theory) was conversant with the lay of the land at harkings?"
"because," answered robin, "the murderer left no tracks on the grass or
flower-beds. he stuck to the hard gravel path throughout. that path,
which runs from the drive through the rosery to the gravel path round
the house just under the library window, is precious hard to find in the
dark, especially where it leaves the drive, as at the outset it is a
mere thread between the rhododendron bushes. and, as i know from
experience, unless you are acquainted with the turns in the path, it is
very easy to get off it in the dark, especially in the rosery, and go
blundering on to the flower-beds. and i'll tell you something else about
the murderer. he--or she--was of small stature--not much above five
foot six in height. the upward diagonal course of the bullet through
parrish's heart shows that ..."
mr. manderton shook his head dubiously.
"very ingenious," he commented. "but you go rather fast, mr. greve. we
must test your theory link by link. there may be an explanation for
jeekes's apparently inexplicable lie to the young lady. let's see him
and hear what he says. the grounds at harkings must be searched for this
second bullet, if second bullet there is, the mark on the tree examined
by an expert. and since two bullets argue two pistols in this case, let
us see what result we get from our enquiries as to where mr. parrish
bought his pistol. he may have had two pistols ..."
"if parrish used a silencer," remarked robin, quite undisconcerted by
the other's lack of enthusiasm, "and my theory that two shots were fired
is correct, there must have been two reports, a loud one and a muffled
one. miss trevert heard one report, as we know. did she hear a second?"
"she said nothing about it," remarked the detective.
"she was probably asked nothing about it. but we can get this point
cleared up at once. there's the telephone. ring up harkings and ask her
now."
"why not?" said mr. manderton and moved to the telephone.
there is little delay on the long-distance lines on a sunday evening,
and the call to harkins came through almost at once. bude answered the
telephone at harkings. manderton asked for miss trevert. the butler
replied that miss trevert was no longer at harkings. she had gone to the
continent for a few days.
this plain statement, retailed in the fortissimo voice which bude
reserved for use on the telephone, produced a remarkable effect on the
detective. he grew red in the face.
"what's that?" he cried assertively. "gone to the continent? i should
have been told about this. why wasn't i informed? what part of the
continent has she gone to?"
mr. manderton's questions, rapped out with a rasping vigour that
recalled a machine-gun firing, brought robin to his feet in an instant.
he crossed over to the desk on which the telephone stood.
manderton placed one big palm over the transmitter and turned to robin.
"she's gone to the continent and left no address," he said quickly.
"ask him if lady margaret is there," suggested robin.
mr. manderton spoke into the telephone again. lady margaret had gone to
bed, bude answered, and her ladyship was much put out by miss trevert
gallivanting off like that by herself with only a scribbled note left to
say that she had gone.
had bude got the note?
no, mr. manderton, sir, he had not. but lady margaret had shown it to
him. it had simply stated that miss trevert had gone off to the
continent and would be back in a few days.
again the detective turned to robin at his elbow.
"these country bumpkins!" he said savagely. "i must go to the yard and
get humphries on the 'phone. he may have telegraphed me about it. you
stay here and i'll ring you later if there's any news. what do you make
of it, mr. greve?"
"it beats me," was robin's rueful comment. "and what about the inquest?
it's for tuesday, isn't it? miss trevert will have to give evidence, i
take it?..."
"oh," said mr. manderton, picking up his hat and speaking in an offhand
way, "i'm getting _that_ adjourned for a week!"
"the inquest adjourned! why?"
there was a twinkle in the detective's eye as he replied.
"i thought, maybe, i might get further evidence ..."
robin caught the expression and smiled.
"and when did you come to this decision, may i ask?"
"after our little experiment in the garden this morning," was the
detective's prompt reply.
robin looked at him fixedly.
"but, see here," he said, "apparently it was to the deductions you
formed from the result of that experiment that i owe the attentions of
your colleagues who have been hanging round the house all day. and yet
you now come to me and invite my assistance. mr. manderton, i don't get
it at all!"
"mr. greve," replied the detective, "miss trevert tried to shield you.
that made me suspicious. you tried to force my investigations into an
entirely new path. that deepened my suspicions. i believed it to be my
duty to ascertain your movements after leaving harkings. but then i
heard jeekes make an apparently gratuitously false statement to miss
trevert with an implication against you. that, to some extent, cleared
you in my eyes. i say 'to some extent' because i will not deny that i
thought i might be taking a risk in coming to you like this. you see i
am frank!..."
the smile had left greve's face and he looked rather grim.
"you're pretty deep, aren't you?" was his brief comment.
chapter xx
the code king
major euan mactavish was packing. a heavy and well-worn leather
portmanteau, much adorned with foreign luggage labels, stood in the
centre of the floor. from a litter of objects piled up on a side table
the major was transferring to it various brown-paper packages which he
checked by a list in his hand.
the major always packed for himself. he packed with the neatness and
rapidity derived from long experience of travel. as a matter of fact, he
could not afford a manservant any more than he could allow himself
quarters more luxurious than the rather grimy bedroom in bury street
which housed him during his transient appearances in town. the
remuneration doled out by the foreign office to the quiet and
unobtrusive gentlemen known as king's messengers is, in point of fact,
out of all proportion to the prestige and glamour surrounding the silver
greyhound badge, an example of which was tucked away in a pocket of the
major's blue serge jacket hanging over the back of a chair.
"let's see," said the major, addressing a large brown-paper covered
package standing in the corner of the room, "you're the bird-cage for
lady sylvia at the hague. two pounds of candles for mrs. harry deepdale
at berlin; the razor blades for sir archibald at prague; the teddy bear
for marjorie; polo-balls for the hussars at constantinople--there! i
think that's the lot! hullo, hullo, who the devil's that?"
with a groaning of wires a jangling bell tinkled through the hall (the
major's bedroom was on the ground floor). sims, the aged ex-butler, who,
with his wife, "did for" his lodgers in more ways than one, was out and
the single servant-maid had her sunday off. euan mactavish glanced at
his wrist watch. it showed the hour to be ten minutes past nine. a
flowered silk smoking-coat over his evening clothes and a briar pipe in
his mouth, he went out into the hall and opened the front door.
it was a drenching night. the lamps from a taxi which throbbed dully in
the street outside the house threw a gleaming band of light on the
shining pavement. at the door stood a taxi-driver.
"there's a lady asking for major mactavish," he said, pointing at the
cab. the major stepped across to the cab and opened the door.
"oh, euan," said a girl's voice, "how lucky i am to catch you!"
"why, mary," exclaimed the major, "what on earth brings you round to me
on a night like this? i only came up from the country this afternoon and
i'm off for constantinople in the morning!"
"euan," said mary trevert, "i want to talk to you. where can we talk?"
the major raised his eyebrows. he was a little man with grizzled hair
and finely cut, rather sharp features.
"well," he remarked, "there's not a soul in the house, and i've only got
a bedroom here. though we're cousins, mary, my dear, i don't know that
you ought to...."
"you're a silly old-fashioned old dear," exclaimed the girl, "and i'm
coming in. no, i'll keep the cab. we shall want it!"
"all right," said the major, helping her to alight. "i tell you what.
we'll go into harry prankhurst's sitting-room. he's away for the
week-end, anyway!"
he took mary trevert into a room off the hall and switched on the
electric light. then for the first time he saw how pale she looked.
"my dear," he said, "i know what an awful shock you've had...."
"you've heard about it?"
"i saw it in the sunday papers. i was going to write to you."
"euan," the girl began in a nervous, hasty way, "i have to go to holland
at once. there is not a moment to lose. i want you to help me get my
passport viseed."
"but, my dear girl," exclaimed the major, aghast, "you can't go to
holland like this alone. does your mother know about it?"
the girl shook her head.
"it's no good trying to stop me, euan," she declared. "i mean to go,
anyway. as a matter of fact, mother doesn't know. i merely left word
that i had gone to the continent for a few days. nobody knows about
holland except you. and if you won't help me i suppose i shall have to
go to harry tadworth at the foreign office. i came to you first because
he's always so stuffy ..."
euan mactavish pushed the girl into a chair and gave her a cigarette. he
lit it for her and took one himself. his pipe had vanished into his
pocket.
"of course, i'll help you," he said. "now, tell me all about it!"
"before ... this happened i had promised hartley parrish to marry him,"
began the girl. "the doctors say his nerves were wrong. i don't believe
a word of it. he was full of the joy of life. he was very fond of me. he
was always talking of what we should do when we were married. he never
would have killed himself without some tremendously powerful motive.
even then i can't believe it possible ..."
she made a little nervous gesture.
"after he ... did it," she went on, "i found this letter on his desk. it
came to him from holland. i mean to see the people who wrote it and
discover if they can throw any light on ... on ... the affair ..."
she had taken from her muff a letter, folded in four, written on paper
of a curious dark slatey-blue colour.
"won't you show me the letter?"
"you promise to say nothing about it to any one?"
he nodded.
"of course."
without a word the girl gave him the letter. with slow deliberation he
unfolded it. the letter was typewritten and headed: "elias van der spyck
& co. general importers, rotterdam."
this was the letter:
elias van der spyck & co.
general importers
rotterdam rotterdam 25th nov.
_codes_
a.b.c.
liebler's
_personal_
dear mr. parrish,
your favor of even date to hand and contents
noted. the last delivery of steel was to time but we have had
warning from the railway authorities that labour troubles at the
docks are likely to delay future consignments. if you don't
mind we should prefer to settle the question of future
delivery by nov. 27 as we have a board meeting on the 30th
inst. while we fully appreciate your own difficulties with
labour at home, you will understand that this is a question
which we cannot afford to adjourn _sine die_.
yours faithfully,
pro elias van der spyck & co.
the signature was illegible.
euan mactavish folded the letter again and handed it back to mary.
"that doesn't take me any farther," he said. "what do the police think
of it?"
"they haven't seen it," was the girl's reply. "i took it without them
knowing. i mean to make my own investigations about this ..."
"but, my dear mary," exclaimed the little major in a shocked voice, "you
can't do things that way! don't you see you may be hindering the course
of justice? the police may attach the greatest importance to this
letter ..."
"you're quite right," retorted the girl, "they do!"
"then why have you kept it from them?"
mary trevert dropped her eyes and a little band of crimson flushed into
her cheeks.
"because," she commenced, "because ... well, because they are trying to
implicate a friend of mine ..."
the major took the girl's hand.
"mary," he said, "i've known you all your life. i've knocked about a
good bit and know something of the world, i believe. suppose you tell me
all about it ..."
mary trevert hesitated. then she said, her hands nervously toying with
her muff:
"we believe that robin greve--you know whom i mean--had a conversation
with hartley just before he ... he shot himself. that very afternoon
robin had asked me to marry him, but i told him about my engagement. he
said some awful things about hartley and rushed away. ten minutes later
hartley parrish committed suicide. and there _was_ some one talking to
him in the library. bude, the butler, heard the voices. this afternoon i
went down to the library alone ... to see if i could discover anything
likely to throw any light on poor hartley's death. this was the only
letter i could find. it was tucked away between two letter-trays. one
tray fitted into the other, and this letter had slipped between. it
seems to have been overlooked both by mr. parrish's secretary and the
police ..."
"but i confess," argued the major, "that i don't see how this letter,
which appears to be a very ordinary business communication, implicates
anybody at all. why shouldn't the police see it?..."
"because," said mary, "directly after discovering it i found bruce
wright, who used to be one of mr. parrish's private secretaries, hiding
behind the curtains in the library. now, bruce wright is a great friend
of robin greve's, and i immediately suspected that robin had sent him
to harkings, particularly as ..."
"as what?..."
"as he practically admitted to me, that he had come for a letter written
on slatey-blue official-looking paper."
the girl held up the letter from rotterdam.
"all this," the girl continued, "made me think that this letter must
have had something to do with hartley's death ..."
"surely an additional reason for giving it to the police!..."
mary trevert set her mouth in an obstinate line.
"no!" she affirmed uncompromisingly. "the police believe that, as the
result of a scene between hartley and robin, hartley killed himself.
until i've found out for certain whether this letter implicates robin or
not, i sha'n't give it to the police ..."
"but, if greve really had nothing to do with this shocking tragedy, the
police can very easily clear him. surely they are the best judges of his
guilt ..."
again a touch of warm colour suffused the girl's cheeks. euan mactavish
remarked it and looked at her wistfully.
"well, well," he observed gently, "perhaps they're not, after all!"
the girl looked up at him.
"euan, dear," she said impulsively, "i knew you'd understand. robin and
hartley may have had a row, but it was nothing worse. robin is incapable
of having threatened--blackmailed--hartley, as the police seem to
imagine. i am greatly upset by it all; i can't see things clear at all;
but i'm determined not to give the police a weapon like this to use
against robin until i know whether it is sharp or blunt, until i have
found out what bearing, if any, this letter had on hartley parrish's
death ..."
euan mactavish leant back in his chair and said nothing. he finished his
cigarette, pitched the butt into the fender, and turned to mary. he
asked her to let him see the letter again. once more he read it over.
then, handing it back to her, he said:
"it's all so simple-looking that there may well be something behind it.
but, if you do go to holland, how are you going to set about your
enquiries?"
"that's where you can help me, euan, dear," answered the girl. "i want
to find somebody at rotterdam who will help me to make some confidential
enquiries about this firm. do you know any one? an englishman would be
best, of course ..."
but euan mactavish was halfway to the door.
"wait there," he commanded, "till i telephone the one man in the world
who can help us."
he vanished into the hall where mary heard him at the instrument.
"we are going round to the albany," he said, "to see my friend, ernest
dulkinghorn, of the war office. he can help us if any one can. but,
mary, you must promise me one thing before we go ... you must agree to
do what old ernest tells you. you needn't be afraid. he is the most
unconventional of men, capable of even approving this madcap scheme of
yours!"
"i agree," said mary, "but how you waste time, euan! we could have been
at the albany by this time!"
in a first-floor oak-panelled suite at the albany, overlooking the
covered walk that runs from piccadilly to burlington gardens, they found
an excessively fair, loose-limbed man whose air of rather helpless
timidity was heightened by a pair of large tortoise-shell spectacles. he
appeared excessively embarrassed at the sight of mactavish's extremely
good-looking companion.
"you never told me you were bringing a lady, euan," he said
reproachfully, "or i should have attempted to have made myself more
presentable."
he looked down at his old flannel suit and made an apologetic gesture
which took in the table littered with books and papers and the sofa on
which lay a number of heavy tomes with marked slips sticking out between
the pages.
"i am working at a code," he explained.
"ernest here," said mactavish, turning to mary, "is the code king. your
pals in the intelligence tell me, ernest, that you've never been beaten
by a code ..."
the fair man laughed nervously.
"they've been pullin' your leg, euan," he said.
"don't you believe him, mary," retorted her cousin. "this is the man who
probably did more than any one man to beat the boche. whenever the
brother hun changed his code, brother ernest was called in and he
produced a key in one, two, three!..."
"what rot you talk, euan!" said dulkinghorn. "working out a code is a
combination of mathematics, perseverance, and inspiration with a good
slice of luck thrown in! but isn't miss trevert going to sit down?"
he cleared the sofa with a sweep of his arm which sent the books flying
on to the floor.
"ernest," said mactavish, "i want you to give miss trevert here a
letter to some reliable fellow in rotterdam who can assist her in making
a few enquiries of a very delicate nature!"
"what sort of enquiries?" asked dulkinghorn bluntly.
"about a firm called elias van der spyck," replied euan.
"of rotterdam?" enquired the other sharply.
"that's right! do you know them?"
"i've heard the name. they do a big business. but hadn't miss trevert
better tell her story herself?"
mary told him of the death of hartley parrish and of the letter she had
found upon his desk. she said nothing of the part played by robin greve.
"hmph!" said dulkinghorn. "you think it might be blackmail, eh? well,
well, it might be. have you got this letter about you? hand it over and
let's have a look at it."
his nervous manner had vanished. his face seemed to take on a much
keener expression. he took the letter from mary and read it through.
then he crossed the room to a wall cupboard which he unlocked with a key
on a chain, produced a small tray on which stood a number of small
bottles, some paint-brushes and pens, and several little open dishes
such as are used for developing photographs. he bore the tray to the
table, cleared a space on a corner by knocking a pile of books and
papers on the floor, and set it down.
"just poke the fire!" he said to euan.
from a drawer in the table he produced a board on which he pinned down
the letter with a drawing-pin at each corner. then he dipped a
paint-brush into one of the bottles and carefully painted the whole
surface of the sheet with some invisible fluid.
"so!" he said, "we'll leave that to dry and see if we can find out any
little secrets, eh? that little tray'll do the trick if there's any
monkey business to this letter of yours, miss trevert. that'll do the
trick, eh, what?"
he paced the room as he talked, not waiting for an answer, but running
on as though he were soliloquizing. presently he turned and swooped down
on the board.
"nothing," he ejaculated. "now for the acids!"
with a little piece of sponge he carefully wiped the surface of the
letter and painted it again with a substance from another bottle.
"just hold that to the fire, would you, euan?" he said, and gave
mactavish the board. he resumed his pacing, but this time he hummed in
the most unmelodious voice imaginable:
she was bright as a butterfly, as fair as a queen,
was pretty little polly perkins, of paddington green.
"it's dry!"
mactavish's voice broke in upon the pacing and the discordant song.
"well?"
dulkinghorn snapped out the question.
"no result!" said euan. he handed him the board.
dulkinghorn cast a glance at it, swiftly removed the letter, held it for
an instant up to the electric light, fingered the paper for a moment,
and handed the letter back to mary.
"if it's code," he said, "it's a conventional code and that always beats
the expert ... at first. go to rotterdam and call on my friend, mr.
william schulz. i'll give you a letter for him and he'll place himself
entirely at your disposition. euan will take you over. holland is on
your beat, ain't it, euan? when do you go next?"
"to-morrow," said the king's messenger. "the boat train leaves liverpool
street at ten o'clock."
"you'll want a passport," said dulkinghorn, turning to the girl.
"you've got it there? good. leave it with me. you shall have it back
properly viseed by nine o'clock to-morrow morning. where are you
stayin'? almond's hotel. good. i'll send the letter for mr. william
schulz with it!"
"but," euan interjected mildly, after making several ineffectual efforts
to stem the torrent of speech, "do you really think that miss trevert
will be well advised to risk this trip to holland alone? hadn't the
police better take the matter in hand?"
"police be damned!" replied dulkinghorn heartily. "miss trevert will be
better than a dozen heavy-handed, heavy-footed plain-clothes men. when
you get to rotterdam, miss trevert, you trot along and call on william
schulz. he'll see you through."
then, to indicate without any possibility of misunderstanding, that his
work had been interrupted long enough, dulkinghorn got up, and, opening
the sitting-room door, led the way into the hall. as he stood with his
hand on the latch of the front door, mary trevert asked him:
"is this mr. schulz an englishman?"
"i'll let you into a secret," answered bulkinghorn; "he _was_. but he
isn't now! no, no, i can't say anything more. you must work it out for
yourself. but i will give you a piece of advice. the less you say about
mr. william schulz and about your private affairs generally when you are
on the other side, the better it will be for you! good-night--and good
luck!"
euan mactavish escorted mary to almond's hotel.
"i'm very much afraid," he said to her as they walked along, "that
you're butting that pretty head of yours into a wasps' nest, mary!"
"nonsense!" retorted the girl decisively; "i can take care of myself!"
"if i consent to let you go off like this," said euan, "it is only on
one condition ... you must tell lady margaret where you are going ..."
"that'll spoil everything," answered mary, pouting; "mother will want to
come with me!"
"no, she won't," urged her cousin, "not if i tell her. she'll worry
herself to death, mary, if she doesn't know what has become of you.
you'd better let me ring her up from the club and tell her you're
running over to rotterdam for a few days. look here, i'll tell her
you're going with me. she'll be perfectly happy if she thinks i'm to be
with you ..."
on that mary surrendered.
"have it your own way," she said.
"i'll pick you up here at a quarter-past nine in the morning," said euan
as he bade the girl good-night at her hotel, "then we'll run down to
the f.o. and collect my bags and go on to the station!"
"euan," the girl asked as she gave him her hand, "who is this man
schulz, do you think?"
the king's messenger leant over and whispered:
"secret service!"
"secret service!"
the girl repeated the words in a hushed voice.
"then mr. dulkinghorn ... is he ... that too?"
euan nodded shortly.
"one of their leadin' lights!" he answered.
"but, euan,"--the girl was very serious now,--"what has the secret
service to do with hartley parrish's clients in holland?"
the king's messenger laid a lean finger along his nose.
"ah!" he said, "what? that's what is beginning to interest me!"
chapter xxi
a word with mr. jeekes
life is like a kaleidoscope, that ingenious toy which was the delight of
the victorian nursery. like the glass fragments in its slide, different
in colour and shape, men's lives lie about without seeming connection;
then fate gives the instrument a shake, and behold! the fragments slide
into position and form an intricate mosaic....
mark how fate proceeded on the wet and raw sunday evening when bruce
wright, at the instance of mr. manderton, quitted robin greve's chambers
in the temple, leaving his friend and the detective alone together. to
tell the truth, bruce wright was in no mood for facing the provincial
gloom of a wet sunday evening in london, nor did he find alluring the
prospect of a suburban supper-party at the quiet house where he lived
with his widowed mother and sisters in south kensington. so, in an
irresolute, unsettled frame of mind, he let himself drift down the
strand unable to bring himself to go home or, indeed, to form any plan.
he crossed trafalgar square, a nocturne in yellow and black--lights
reflected yellow in pavements shining dark with wet--and by and by
found himself in pall mall. here it was that fate took a hand. at this
moment it administered a preliminary jog to the kaleidoscope and brought
the fragment labelled bruce wright into immediate proximity with the
piece entitled albert edward jeekes.
as bruce wright came along pall mall, he saw mr. jeekes standing on the
steps of his club. the little secretary appeared to be lost in thought,
his chin thrust down on the crutch-handle of the umbrella he clutched to
himself. so absorbed was he in his meditations that he did not observe
bruce wright stop and regard him. it was not until our young man had
touched him on the arm that he looked up with a start.
"god bless my soul!" he exclaimed, "if it isn't young wright!"
now the sight of jeekes had put a great idea into the head of our young
friend. he had been more chagrined than he had let it appear to robin
greve at his failure to recover the missing letter from the library at
harkings. to obtain the letter--or, at any rate, a copy of it--from
jeekes and to hand it to robin greve would, thought bruce, restore his
prestige as an amateur detective, at any rate in his own eyes. moreover,
a chat with jeekes over the whole affair seemed a heaven-sent exit from
the _impasse_ of boredom into which he had drifted this wet sunday
evening.
"how are you, mr. jeekes?" said bruce briskly. ("mr." jeekes was the
form of address always accorded to the principal secretary in the
hartley parrish establishment and bruce resumed it instinctively.) "i
was anxious to see you. i called in at the club this afternoon. did you
get my message?"
the little secretary blinked at him through his _pince-nez_.
"there have been so many messages about this shocking affair that really
i forget ..."
he sighed heavily.
"couldn't i come in and have a yarn now?"
bruce spoke cajolingly. but mr. jeekes wrinkled his brow fussily.
there was so much to do; he had had a long day; if wright would excuse
him ...
"as a matter of fact," explained bruce with an eye on his man, "i wanted
to see you particularly about a letter ..."
"some other time ... to-morrow ..."
"written on dark-blue paper ... you know, one of those letters h.p. made
all the fuss about."
mr. jeekes took his _pince-nez_ from his nose, gave the glasses a hasty
rub with his pocket-handkerchief, and replaced them. he slanted a long
narrow look at the young man.
then, "what letter do you mean?" he asked composedly.
"a letter which lay on h.p.'s desk in the library at harkings when they
found the body ..."
"there _was_ a letter there then ...?"
"haven't _you_ got it?"
jeekes shook his head.
"come inside for a minute and tell me about this," he said.
he led bruce into the vast smoking-room of the club. they took seats in
a distant corner near the blazing fire. the room was practically
deserted.
now, mr. jeekes's excessive carefulness about money had been a
long-standing joke amongst his assistants when bruce wright had belonged
to hartley parrish's secretarial staff. thrift had become with him more
than a habit. it was a positive obsession. it revealed itself in such
petty meannesses as a perpetual cadging for matches or small change and
a careful abstention from any offer of hospitality. never in the whole
course of his service had bruce wright heard of mr. jeekes taking
anybody out to lunch or extending any of the usual hospitalities of
life. he was not a little surprised, therefore, to hear jeekes ask him
what he would take.
bruce said he would take some coffee.
"have a liqueur? have a cigar?" said jeekes, turning to bruce from the
somnolent waiter who had answered the bell.
there was a strange eagerness, a sort of over-done cordiality, in the
invitation which contrasted so strongly with the secretary's habits that
robin felt dimly suspicious. he suddenly formed the idea that mr. jeekes
wanted to pump him. he refused the liqueur, but accepted a cigar. jeekes
waited until they had been served and the waiter had withdrawn silently
into the dim vastness of the great room before he spoke.
"now, then, young wright," he said, "what's this about a letter? tell me
from the beginning ..."
bruce told him of the letter from elias van der spyck & co. which robin
had seen upon the desk in the library at harkings, of his (bruce's)
journey down to harkings that afternoon and of his failure to find the
letter.
"but why do you assume that i've got it?"
there was an air of forced joviality about mr. jeekes as he put the
question which did not in the least, as he undoubtedly intended it
should, disguise his eagerness. on the contrary, it lent his rather
undistinguished features an expression of cunning which can only be
described as knavish. bruce wright, who, as will already have been seen,
was a young man with all his wits about him, did not fail to remark it.
the result was that he hastily revised an intention half-formed in his
mind of taking jeekes a little way into his confidence regarding robin
greve's doubts and suspicions about hartley parrish's death.
but he answered the secretary's question readily enough.
"because miss trevert told me you went to the library immediately you
arrived at harkings last night. i consequently assumed that you must
have taken away the letter seen by robin greve ..."
mr. jeekes drew in his breath with a sucking sound. it was a little
trick of his when about to speak.
"so you saw miss trevert at harkings, eh?"
bruce laughed.
"i did," he said. "we had quite a dramatic meeting, too--it was like a
scene from a film!"
and, with a little good-humoured exaggeration, he gave mr. jeekes a
description of his encounter with mary. and lest it should seem that
young wright was allowing mr. jeekes to pump him, it should be stated
that bruce was well aware of one of the secretary's most notable
characteristics, a common failing, be it remarked, of the small-minded,
and that was an overpowering suspicion of anything resembling a leading
question. in order, therefore, to gain his confidence, he willingly
satisfied the other's curiosity regarding his visit to harkings hoping
thereby to extract some information as to the whereabouts of the letter
on the slatey-blue paper.
"there was no letter of this description on the desk, you say, when you
and miss trevert looked?" asked jeekes when bruce had finished his
story.
"nothing but circulars and bills," bruce replied.
mr. jeekes leaned forward and drank off his coffee with a swift
movement. then he said carelessly:
"from what you tell me, miss trevert would have been perhaps a minute
alone in the room without your seeing her?"
bruce agreed with a nod.
adjusting his _pince-nez_ on his nose the secretary rose to his feet.
"very glad to have seen you again, wright," he said, thrusting out a
limp hand; "must run off now--mass of work to get through ..."
then bruce risked his leading question.
"if you haven't got this letter," he observed, "what has become of it?
obviously the police are not likely to have taken it because they know
nothing of its significance ..."
"quite, quite," answered mr. jeekes absently, but without replying to
the young man's question.
"why," asked bruce boldly, "did old h.p. make such a mystery about these
letters on the slatey-blue paper, mr. jeekes?"
the secretary wrinkled up his thin lips and sharp nose into a cunning
smile.
"when you get to be my age, young wright," he made answer, "you will
understand that every man has a private side to his life. and, if you
have learnt your job properly, you will also know that a private
secretary's first duty is to mind his own business. about this letter
now--it's the first i've heard of it. take my advice and don't bother
your head about it. _if_ it exists ..."
"but it _does_ exist," broke in bruce quickly. "mr. greve saw it and
read it himself ..."
mr. jeekes laughed drily.
"don't you forget, young wright," he said, jerking his chin towards the
youngster in a confidential sort of way, "don't you forget that mr.
greve is anxious to find a plausible motive for mr. parrish's suicide.
people are talking, you understand! that's all i've got to say! just you
think it over ..."
bruce wright bristled up hotly at this.
"i don't see you have any reason to try and impugn greve's motive for
wishing to get at the bottom of this mysterious affair ..."
mr. jeekes affected to be engrossed in the manicuring of his nails. very
intently he rubbed the nails of one hand against the palm of the other.
"no mystery!" he said decisively with a shake of the head: "no mystery
whatsoever about it, young wright, except what the amateur detectives
will try and make it out to be. or has mr. greve discovered a mystery
already?"
the question came out artfully. but in the quick glance which
accompanied it, there was an intent watchfulness which startled bruce
accustomed as he was to the mild and unemotional ways of the little
secretary.
"not that i know of," said bruce. "greve is only puzzled like all of us
that h.p. should have done a thing like this!"
mr. jeekes was perfectly impassive again.
"the nerves, young wright! the nerves!" he said impressively. "harley
street, not mr. greve, will supply the motive to this sad affair,
believe me!"
with that he accompanied the young man to the door of the club and from
the vestibule watched him sally forth into the rain of pall mall.
then mr. jeekes turned to the hall porter.
"please get me stevenish one-three-seven," he said, "it's a trunk call.
don't let them put you off with 'no reply.' it's harkings, and they are
expecting me to ring them. i shall be in the writing room."
when, twenty minutes later, mr. jeekes emerged from the trunk call
telephone box in the club vestibule, his mouth was drooping at the
corners and his hands trembled curiously. he stood for an instant in
thought tapping his foot on the marble floor of the deserted hall dimly
lit by a single electric bulb burning over the hall porter's box. then
he went back to the writing-room and returned with a yellow telegram
form.
"send a boy down to charing cross with that at once, please," he said to
the night porter.
fate which had brought bruce wright face to face with mr. jeekes gave
the kaleidoscope another jerk that night. as bruce wright entered the
tube station at dover street to go home to south kensington, it occurred
to him that he would ring up robin greve at his chambers in the temple
and give him an outline of his (bruce's) talk with jeekes. bruce went to
the public callbox in the station, but the rhythmic "zoom-er! zoom-er!
zoom-er!" which announces that a number is engaged was all the
satisfaction he got. the prospect of waiting about the draughty station
exit did not appeal to him, so he decided to go home and telephone
robin, as originally arranged, in the morning.
just about the time that he made this resolve, robin in his rooms in the
temple was hanging up the receiver of his telephone with a dazed
expression in his eyes. mr. manderton had rung him up with a piece of
intelligence which fairly bewildered him. it bewildered mr. manderton
also, as the detective was frank enough to acknowledge.
mary trevert had gone to rotterdam for a few days in company with her
cousin, major euan mactavish. mr. manderton had received this
astonishing information by telephone from harkings a few minutes before.
"it bothers me properly, mr. greve, sir," the detective had added.
"there's only one thing for it, manderton," robin had said; "i'll have
to go after her ..."
"the very thing i was about to suggest myself, mr. greve. you're
unofficial-like and can be more helpful than if we detailed one of our
own people from the yard. and with the investigation in its present
stage i don't reely feel justified in going off on a wild-goose chase
myself. there are several important enquiries going forward now, notably
as to where mr. parrish bought his pistol. but we certainly ought to
find out what takes miss trevert careering off to rotterdam in this
way ..."
"it seems almost incredible," robin had said, "but it looks to me as
though miss trevert must have found out something about the letter ..."
"or found it herself ..."
"by jove! she was in the library when bruce wright was there. this
settles it, manderton. i must go!"
"then," said the detective, "i'm going to entrust you with that slotted
sheet of paper again. for i have an idea, mr. greve, that you may get a
glimpse of that letter before i do. i'll send a messenger round with it
at once."
then a difficulty arose. manderton had not got the girl's address. they
had no address at harkings. nor did he know what train miss trevert had
taken. she might have gone by the 9 p.m. that night. had mr. greve got a
passport? yes, robin had a passport, but it was not viseed for holland.
that meant he could not leave until the following evening. then robin
had a "brain wave."
"there's an air service to rotterdam!" he exclaimed. "it doesn't leave
till noon. a pal of mine went across by it only last week. that will
leave me time to get my passport stamped at the dutch consulate, to
catch the air mail, and be in rotterdam by tea-time! and, manderton, i
shall go to the grand hotel. that's where my friend stopped. wire me
there if there's any news ..."
air travel is so comfortably regulated at the present day that robin
greve, looking back at his trip by air from croydon aerodrome to the big
landing-ground outside rotterdam, acknowledged that he had more
excitement in his efforts to stir into action a lethargic dutch passport
official in london, so as to enable him to catch the air mail, than in
the smooth and uneventful voyage across the channel. he reached
rotterdam on a dull and muggy afternoon and lost no time in depositing
his bag at the grand hotel. an enquiry at the office there satisfied him
that mary trevert had not registered her name in the hotel book. then he
set out in a taxi upon a dreary round of the principal hotels.
but fate, which loves to make a sport of lovers, played him a scurvy
trick. in the course of his search it brought robin to that very hotel
towards which, at the selfsame moment, mary trevert was driving from
the station. by the time she arrived, robin was gone and, with despair
in his heart, had started on a tour of the second-class hotels, checking
them by the baedeker he had bought in the strand that morning. it was
eight o'clock by the time he had finished. he had drawn a blank.
the sight of a huge, plate-glass-fronted cafe reminded him that in the
day's rush he had omitted to lunch. so he paid off his taxi and dined
off succulent dutch beefsteak, pounded as soft as velvet and swimming
with butter and served in a bed of deliciously browned 'earth apples,'
as the hollaenders call potatoes. the cafe was stiflingly hot; there was
a large and noisy orchestra in the front part and a vast billiard-saloon
in the back--a place of shaded lights, clicking balls, and guttural
exclamations. the heat of the place, the noise and the cries combined
with the effect of his long journey in the fresh air to make him very
drowsy. when he had finished dinner he was content to postpone his
investigations until the morrow and go to bed. emerging from the cafe he
found to his relief that his hotel was but a few houses away.
as he sat at breakfast the next morning, enjoying the admirable dutch
coffee, he reviewed the situation very calmly but very thoroughly. he
told himself that he had no indication as to mary trevert's business in
rotterdam save the supposition that she had found the van der spyck
letter and had come to rotterdam to investigate the matter for herself.
he realized that the hypothesis was thin, for, in the first place, mary
could have no inkling as to the hidden significance of the document,
and, in the second place, she was undoubtedly under the impression that
hartley parrish was driven to suicide by his (robin's) threats.
but, in the absence of any other apparent explanation of the girl's
extraordinary decision to come to rotterdam, robin decided he would
accept the theory that she had come about the van der spyck letter. how
like mary, after all, he mused, self-willed, fearless, independent, to
rush off to holland on her own on a quest like this! where would her
investigations lead her? to the offices of elias van der spyck & co., to
be sure! robin threw his napkin down on the table, thrust back his
chair, and went off to the hotel porter to locate the address of the
firm.
the telephone directory showed that the offices were situated in the
oranien-straat, about ten minutes' walk from the hotel, in the business
quarter of the city round the bourse. robin glanced at the clock. it
was twenty minutes to ten. the principals, he reflected, were not likely
to be at the office before ten o'clock. it was a fine morning and he
decided to walk. the hotel porter gave him a few simple directions: the
gentleman could not miss the way, he said; so robin started off, hope
high in his breast of getting a step nearer to the elucidation of the
mystery of the library at harkings.
a brisk walk of about ten minutes through the roaring streets of the
city brought him to a big open square from which, he had been
instructed, the oranien-straat turned off. he was just passing a large
and important-looking post-office--he remarked it because he looked up
at a big clock in the window to see the time--when a man came hastily
through the swing-door and stopped irresolutely on the pavement in
front, glancing to right and left as a man does who is looking for a
cab.
at the sight of him robin could scarcely suppress an expression of
amazement. it was mr. jeekes.
chapter xxii
the man with the yellow face
in a narrow, drowsy side street at rotterdam, bisected by a somnolent
canal, stood flush with the red-brick sidewalk a small clean house. wire
blinds affixed to the windows of its ground and first floors gave it a
curious blinking air as though its eyes were only half open. to the neat
green front door was affixed a large brass plate inscribed with the
single name: "schulz."
a large woman, in a pink print dress with a white cloth bound about her
head, was vigorously polishing the plate as, on the morning following
her departure from london, mary trevert, dulkinghorn's letter of
introduction in her pocket, arrived in front of the residence of mr.
william schulz. euan mactavish had, on the previous evening, seen her to
her hotel and had then--very reluctantly, as it seemed to
mary--departed to continue his journey to the hague, his taxi piled high
with white-and-green foreign office bags, heavily sealed with scarlet
wax.
mary trevert approached the woman, her letter of introduction, which
dulkinghorn, being an unusual person, had fastened down, in her hand.
"schulz?" she said interrogatively.
"_nicht da_," replied the woman without looking up from her rubbing.
"has he gone out?" asked mary in english.
"_verstehe nicht_!" mumbled the woman.
but she put down her cleaning-rag and, breathing heavily, mustered the
girl with a leisurely stare.
mary repeated the question in german whereupon the woman brightened up
considerably.
the _herr_ was not at home. the _herr_ had gone out. on business,
_jawohl_. to the bank, perhaps. but the _herr_ would be back in time for
_mittagessen_ at noon. there was beer soup followed by _rindfleisch_ ...
mary hesitated an instant. she was wondering whether she should leave
her letter of introduction. she decided she would leave it. so she wrote
on her card: "anxious to see you as soon as possible" and the name of
her hotel, and gave it, with the letter, to the woman.
"please see that herr schulz gets that directly he comes in," she said.
"it is important!"
"_gut, gut_!" said the woman, wiping her hands on her apron. she took
the card and letter, and mary, thanking her, set off to go back to her
hotel.
about twenty yards from mr. schulz's house a narrow alley ran off. as
mary turned to regain the little footbridge across the canal to return
to the noisy street which would take her back to the hotel, she caught
sight of a man disappearing down this alley.
she only had a glimpse of him, but it was sufficient to startle her
considerably. he was a small man wearing a tweed cap and a tweed
travelling ulster of a vivid brown. it was not these details, however,
which took her aback. it was the fact that in the glimpse she had had of
the man's face she had seemed to recognize the features of mr. albert
edward jeekes.
"what an extraordinary thing!" mary said to herself. "it _can't_ be mr.
jeekes. but if it is not, it is some one strikingly like him!"
to get another view of the stranger she hurried to the corner of the
alley. it was a mere thread of a lane, not above six yards wide, running
between the houses a distance of some sixty yards to the next street.
but the alley was empty. the stranger had disappeared.
mary went a little way down the lane. a wooden fence ran down it on
either side, with doors at intervals apparently giving on the back yards
of the houses in the street. there was no sign of mr. jeekes's double,
so she retraced her steps and returned to her hotel without further
incident.
she had not been back more than half an hour when a waiter came in to
the lounge where she was sitting.
"miss trevert?" he said. "zey ask for you at ze delephone!"
he took her to a cabin under the main staircase.
"this is miss trevert speaking!" said mary.
"i am speaking for mr. schulz," a man's voice answered--rather a nasal
voice with a shade of foreign inflexion--"he has had your letter. he is
very sorry he has been detained in the country, but would be very glad
if you would lunch with him to-day at his country-house."
"i shall be very pleased," the girl replied. "is it far?"
"only just outside rotterdam," the voice responded. "mr. schulz will
send the car to the hotel to pick you up at 11.45. the driver will ask
for you. is that all right?"
"certainly," said mary. "please thank mr. schulz and tell him i will
expect the car at a quarter to twelve!"
punctually at the appointed hour an open touring-car drove up to the
hotel. mary was waiting at the entrance. the driver was a young dutchman
in a blue serge suit. he jumped out and came up to mary.
"mees trevert?" he said.
mary nodded, whereupon he helped her into the car, then got back into
the driving-seat and they drove away.
a run of about twenty minutes through trim suburbs brought them out on a
long straight road, paved with bricks and lined with poplars. the day
was fine with a little bright sunshine from time to time and a high wind
which kept the sails of the windmills dotting the landscape turning
briskly. they followed the road for a bit, then branched off down a side
turning which led to a black gate. it bore the name "villa bergendal" in
white letters. the gate opened into a short drive fringed by thick
laurel bushes which presently brought them in view of an ugly square
red-brick house.
the car drew up at a creeper-hung porch paved in red tiles. the
chauffeur helped mary to alight and, pushing open a glass door, ushered
the girl into a square, comfortably furnished hall. some handsome
oriental rugs were spread about: trophies of native weapons hung on the
walls, and there were some fine specimens of old dutch chests and blue
delft ware.
the chauffeur led the way across the hall to a door at the far end. as
mary followed him, something bright lying on one of the chests caught
her eye. it was a vivid brown travelling ulster and on it lay a brown
tweed cap.
mary trevert was no fool. she was, on the contrary, a remarkably
quick-witted young person. the sight of that rather "loud" overcoat
instantly recalled the stranger so strikingly resembling mr. jeekes who
had disappeared down the lane as she was coming away from mr. schulz's
house. mr. jeekes _was_ in rotterdam then, and had, of course, been sent
by her mother to look after her. what a fool she had been to allow euan
mactavish to persuade her to tell her mother of her plans!
mary suddenly felt very angry. how dare mr. jeekes spy on her like this!
she was quite capable, she told herself, of handling her own affairs,
and she intended to tell the secretary so very plainly. and if, as she
was beginning to believe, mr. schulz were acting hand in glove with mr.
jeekes, she would let him know equally plainly that she had no intention
of troubling him, but would make her own investigations independently.
with a heightened colour she followed the chauffeur and passed through
the door he held open for her.
she found herself in a small, pleasant room with a bright note of colour
in the royal blue carpet and window-curtains. a log-fire burned
cheerfully in the fireplace before which a large red-leather
chesterfield was drawn up. on the walls hung some good old dutch prints,
and there were a couple of bookcases containing books which, by their
bindings at least, seemed old and valuable.
at the farther end of the room was another door across which a curtain
of royal blue was drawn. mary had scarcely entered the room when this
door opened and a man appeared.
he was carefully dressed in a well-cut suit of some dark material and
wore a handsome pearl pin in his black tie. he was a dark, sallow type
of man, his skin yellowed as though from long residence in the tropics.
a small black moustache, carefully trained outwards from the lips,
disclosed, as he smiled a greeting at his visitor, a line of broken
yellow teeth. his hair, which was grizzled at the temples, was black and
oily and brushed right back off the forehead. with his coarse black
hair, his sallow skin, and his small beady eyes, rather like a snake's,
there was something decidedly un-english about him. as mary trevert
looked at him, somewhat taken aback by his sudden appearance, she became
conscious of a vague feeling of mistrust welling up within her.
the man closed the door behind him and advanced into the room, his hand
extended. mary took it. it was dank and cold to the touch.
"a thousand apologies, my dear miss trevert," he said in a soft, silky
voice, a trifle nasal, with a touch of continental inflexion, "for
asking you to come out here to see me. the fact is i had an important
business conference here this morning and i have a second one this
afternoon. it was materially impossible for me to come into rotterdam ...
but i am forgetting my manners. let me introduce myself. i am
mr. schulz ..."
mary trevert looked at him thoughtfully. was this the friend of ernest
dulkinghorn, the man of confidence to whom he had recommended her? a
feeling of great uneasiness came over her. she listened. the house was
absolutely still. from the utter silence enveloping it--for aught she
knew--she and her unsavoury-looking companion might be the only persons
in it. and then she realized that, on the faith of a telephone call, she
had blindly come out to a house, the very address of which was utterly
unknown to her.
she fought down a sudden sensation of panic that made her want to
scream, to bolt from the room into the fresh air, anywhere away from
those snake eyes, that soft voice, that clammy hand. she collected her
thoughts, remembered that jeekes must be somewhere in the house, as his
outdoor things were in the hall. the recollection reminded her of her
determination to tolerate no interference from jeekes or her mother.
so she merely answered: "it was no trouble to come," and waited for the
man to speak again.
he pulled forward the chesterfield and made her sit down beside him.
"i had the letter of introduction," he said, "and i want you to know
that my services are entirely at your disposal. now, what can i do for
you?"
he looked at the girl intently--rather anxiously, she thought.
"that was explained in the letter," she answered, meeting his gaze
unflinchingly.
"yes, yes, of course, i know. i meant in what way do you propose to make
use of my ... my local knowledge?"
"i will tell you that, mr. schulz," mary trevert said in a measured
voice, "when you tell me what you think of the mission which has brought
me here ..."
the snake's eyes narrowed a little.
"for a young lady to have come out alone to holland on a mission of this
description speaks volumes for your pluck and self-reliance, miss
trevert ..."
"i asked you what you thought of my mission to holland, mr. schulz,"
mary interposed coldly.
it was beginning to dawn on her that mr. schulz did not seem to know
anything about the object of her visit, but, on the contrary, was
seeking to elicit this from her by a process of adroit cross-examination.
she was rather puzzled, therefore, but also somewhat relieved
when he said:
"i can give my opinion better after you have shown me the letter ..."
"what letter?" said the girl.
"the letter from elias van der spyck and company, to be sure," retorted
the other quickly.
mary dipped her hand into her black fox muff. then she hesitated. she
could not rid herself of the suspicion that this man with the sallow
face and the yellow fangs was not to be trusted. she withdrew her hand.
"this is a very delicate matter, mr. schulz," she said. "our appointment
was made by telephone, and i think therefore i should ask you to show me
mr. dulkinghorn's letter of introduction before i go any further, so
that i may feel quite sure in my mind that i am dealing with one in whom
i know mr. dulkinghorn to have every confidence ..."
mr. schulz's yellow face went a shade yellower. his mouth twisted itself
into a wry smile, his thin lips fleshing his discoloured teeth. he
stood up rather stiffly.
"you are a guest in my house, miss trevert," he said with offended
dignity, "i scarcely expected you to impugn my good faith. surely my
word is sufficient ..."
he turned his back on her and took a couple of paces into the room in
apparent vexation. then he returned and stood at the back of the
chesterfield behind her. his feet made no sound on the thick carpet, but
some vague instinct made mary trevert turn her head. she saw him
standing there, twisting his hands nervously behind his back.
"surely my word is sufficient ..." he repeated.
"in business," said mary boldly, "one cannot be too careful."
"besides," mr. schulz urged, "this was a private letter which mr. ...
mr. dulkinghorn certainly did not expect you to see. that makes
it awkward ..."
"i think in the circumstances," said mary, "i must insist, mr. schulz!"
she was now feeling horribly frightened. she strained her ears in vain
for a sound. the whole house seemed wrapped in a grave-like quiet. the
smile had never left mr. schulz's face. but it was a cruel, wolfish grin
without a ray of kindliness in it. the girl felt her heart turn cold
within her every time her eyes fell on the mask-like face.
mr. schulz shrugged shoulders.
"since you insist ..." he remarked. "but i think it is scarcely fair on
our friend dulkinghorn. the letter is in the safe in my office next
door. if you come along i will get it out and show it to you ..."
he spoke unconcernedly, but stiffly, as though to emphasize the slight
put upon his dignity. one hand thrust jauntily in his jacket pocket, he
stepped across the carpet to the door with the blue curtain. he opened
it, then stood back for the girl to pass in before him.
"after you!" he said.
he had placed himself so close to the doorway that the black fox about
her neck brushed his face as she passed. suddenly a warm, sickly whiff
of some sweet-smelling odour came to her. she stopped on the instant,
irresolute, alarmed. then a dank hand was clapped on her face, covering
nostrils and mouth with a soft cloth reeking with a horrible cloying
drug. an arm with muscles like steel was passed round her waist and held
her in a vice-like grip against which she struggled in vain. she felt
her senses slipping, slipping ...
chapter xxiii
two's company ...
on the pavement opposite the post-office stood one of those high pillars
which are commonly used in continental cities for the display of theatre
and concert advertisements. robin instantly stepped behind it. it was
not that he wished to avoid being seen by jeekes as much as that he had
not decided in his mind what course he had best pursue. from behind the
cover of the pillar he mustered his man.
the little secretary looked strange and unfamiliar in a sporting sort of
travelling ulster of a tawny brown hue and a cap of the same stuff. but
there was no mistaking the watery eyes, the sharp nose, the features. he
had obviously not seen robin. his whole attention was rivetted on the
street. he kept peering nervously to right and left as though expecting
some one.
suddenly he stepped forward quickly to the kerb. then robin saw an open
car detach itself from the press of traffic in the square and, driven
very fast, approach the post-office. it was a large car with a grey
body; a sallow man wearing a black felt hat sat at the wheel. the car
drew up at the kerb and halted within a few feet of the advertisement
pillar. robin backed hastily round it to escape observation. he had
resolved to do nothing until he had ascertained who jeekes's friend was
and what business the secretary had with him.
"it's all right," robin heard the man in the car say in english; "i
telephoned the girl and she's coming. what a piece of luck, eh?"
robin heard the click of the car door as it swung open.
"... better get along out there at once," he heard the man in the car
say, "i'm sending jan in the car for her at ..."
then robin stepped out unexpectedly from behind his pillar and cannoned
into mr. jeekes, who was just entering the car.
"good-morning," said robin with easy assurance; "i'm delighted to hear
that you've found miss trevert, jeekes, for, to tell the truth, i was
feeling somewhat uneasy about her ..."
the secretary's face was a study. the surprise of seeing robin, who had
dropped, it seemed to him, out of the clouds into the city of rotterdam,
deprived him of speech for an instant. he blinked his eyes, looked this
way and that, and finally, with a sort of blind gesture, readjusted his
_pince-nez_ and glared at the intruder.
then, without a word, he got into the car. but robin, with a firm hand,
stayed the door which jeekes would have closed behind him.
"excuse me," robin remarked decidedly, "but i'm coming with you if your
friend"--at this he looked at the man in the driving-seat--"has no
objection ..."
mr. jeekes cast a frightened glance at the sallow man.
the latter said impatiently:
"we're wasting time, jeekes. who is this gentleman?"
"this is mr. greve," said the little secretary hurriedly, "a friend of
mr. parrish and miss trevert. he was staying in the house at the time of
the tragedy. he has, i understand, taken a prominent part in the
investigations as to the motive of our poor friend's sad end ..."
mr. jeekes looked to robin as he said this as though for confirmation.
the man at the driving-wheel turned and gave the little secretary a
quick glance. then he mustered robin with a slow, insolent stare. he had
a yellow face and small black eyes quick and full of intelligence.
then he bowed.
"my name is victor," he said. "the sad news about mr. parrish was a
great shock to me. i met him several times in london. were you anxious
to see miss ... er ... trevert? she has come to rotterdam (so my friend
jeekes tells me) to look into certain important business transactions
which the late mr. parrish had in hand at the time of his death. did i
understand you to say that you were uneasy about this lady? is there any
mystery about her journey?..."
for the moment robin felt somewhat abashed. the question was rather a
poser. was there, in effect, any mystery about mary's trip to rotterdam
accompanied by her cousin? she had acquainted her people at harkings
with her plans. what if, after all, everything was open and above-board,
and she had merely come to rotterdam on business? it seemed difficult to
believe. surely in such a case the solicitor, bardy, would have been the
more suitable emissary ...
"you'll forgive us, i'm sure," the yellow-faced man remarked suavely,
"but we're in a great hurry. would you mind closing that door?..."
robin closed the door. but he got into the car first. as he had stood on
the pavement in doubt, the recollection of jeekes's inexplicable lie
about the payments made by parrish for the french lady in the mayfair
flat came back to him and deepened the suspicion in his mind. it would
in any case, he told himself, do no harm to find out who this rather
unsavoury-looking rotterdam friend of jeekes's was ...
so robin jumped into the car and sat down on the back seat next to the
secretary.
"it happens," he said, "that i am particularly anxious to see miss
trevert. as i gather you are going to meet her, i feel sure you won't
mind my accompanying you ..."
the yellow-faced man turned with an easy smile.
"sorry," he said, "but we are having a meeting with miss trevert on
private business and i'm afraid we cannot take you along. jeekes here,
however, could take a message to miss trevert and if she _wanted_ to see
you ..."
he broke off significantly and smiled slily at the secretary. robin felt
himself flush. so jeekes had been telling tales out of school to mr.
victor, had he? the young man squared his jaw. that settled it. he would
stay.
"i promise not to butt in on your private business," he replied, "but i
simply must see miss trevert before i go back to london. so, if you
don't mind, i think i'll come along ..."
the yellow-faced man glanced at his wrist watch.
"i can't prevent you!" he exclaimed. then he rapped out something in
dutch to jeekes. the secretary leaned forward to catch the remark. the
yellow-faced man threw in the clutch.
"goed!" (good), answered jeekes in the same language, and resumed his
seat as the car glided smoothly away from the kerb into the traffic of
the busy square. robin settled himself back in the seat with an
inaudible sigh of satisfaction. he did not like the look of jeekes's
companion, he told himself, and mr. victor, whoever he was, had
certainly manifested no great desire for robin's company. but he was
going to see mary. that was all that counted for the moment.
they threaded their way through the streets in silence. it passed
through robin's mind to start a discussion with jeekes about the death
of hartley parrish. but in the circumstances he conceived it might
easily assume a controversial character, and he did not want to take any
risk of jeopardizing his chance of meeting mary again. and no other
subject of conversation occurred to him. he did not know jeekes at all
well, knew him in fact only as a week-end guest knows the private
secretary of his host, a shadowy personality, indispensable and part of
the household, but scarcely more than a name ...
the car had put on speed as they left the more crowded streets and
emerged into the suburbs. now they were running over a broad straight
main road lined with poplars. robin wondered whither they were bound.
he was about to put the question to the secretary when the man victor
turned his head and said over his shoulder:
"_nu_!"
at the same moment the speed of the car sensibly diminished.
jeekes put his arm across the young man at his side.
"that door," he said, touching his sleeve, "doesn't seem to be properly
shut. would you mind ..."
robin pushed the door with his hand.
"it seems all right," he said.
"permit me ..."
the secretary stretched across and pulled back the latch, releasing the
door. it swung out.
"now close it," said mr. jeekes.
the door was flapping to and fro with the swaying of the car over the
rough road and robin had to half rise in order to comply with the
request. he was leaning forward, steadying himself with one hand
grasping the back of the driving-seat, when he received a tremendous
shove in the back. at the same moment the car seemed to leap forward: he
made a desperate effort to regain his balance, failed, and was whirled
out head foremost on to the side of the road.
fortunately for himself he fell soft. the road ran here through a
little wood of young oak and beech which came right down to the edge of
the _chaussee_. the ground was deep in withered leaves which, with the
rain and the water draining from the road's high camber, were soft and
soggy. robin went full length into this muss with a thud that shook
every bone in his body. his left leg, catching in a bare gorse-bush,
acted as a brake and stopped him from rolling farther. he sat up, his
mouth full of mud and his hair full of wet leaves, and felt himself
carefully over. he contemplated rather ruefully a long rent in the left
leg of his trousers just across the knee.
"jeekes!" he murmured; "he pushed me out! the dirty dog!"
then he remembered that, with the men in the car gone, he had lost trace
again of mary trevert. his forcible ejection from the car was evidence
enough of their determination to deal with mary without interference
from outside. it looked ominous. robin sprang to his feet and rushed to
the middle of the road.
the _chaussee_ was absolutely empty. about a hundred yards from where he
stood in the direction in which the car had been travelling the road
made a sharp bend to the right, thus curtailing his view. robin did not
hesitate. not waiting to retrieve his hat or even to wipe the mud from
his face, he started off at a brisk run along the road in the direction
in which the car had disappeared. he had not gone far before he found
that his heavy overcoat was seriously impeding him. he stripped it off
and, folding it, hid it beneath a bush just inside the plantation. then
he ran on again.
fresh disappointment awaited him when he rounded the bend in the road. a
few hundred yards on the road turned again. there was no sign of the
car. a cart piled high with manure was approaching, the driver, wearing
wooden shoes and cracking at intervals a huge whip, trudging at the
side.
robin stopped him.
"motor-car? automobile?" he asked pointing in the direction from which
the cart had come. the driver stared at him with a look of owlish
stupidity.
"automobile?" repeated robin. "tuff-tuff?"
very slowly a grin suffused the carter's grimy face. he showed a row of
broken black teeth. a tiny stream of saliva escaped from the corner of
his mouth and trickled over the reddish stubble on his chin. then he
continued his way, turning his head every now and then to display his
idiot's grin.
"damnation!" exclaimed robin, starting to run again. "not a soul to ask
in this accursed desert except the village idiot! oh! that jeekes! i'll
wring his blinking neck when i get hold of him!"
he was furious with himself for the abject way in which he had been
fooled. the man victor had given jeekes his orders in dutch and had
purposely picked a soft spot on the roadside and slowed down the car in
order that the unwelcome intruder might be ejected as safely as
possible. and to think that robin had blandly allowed jeekes to open the
door and throw him out on the road!
he was round the second bend now. the sun was shining with a quite
respectable warmth and the steamy air made him desperately hot. the
perspiration rolled off his face. but he never slackened his gait. robin
knew these continental roads and their habit of running straight. he
reckoned confidently on presently coming upon a long stretch where he
might discern the car.
he was not deceived. after the second bend the _chaussee_, just as he
anticipated, straightened out and ran clear away between an
ever-narrowing double line of poplars to become a bluish blob on the
horizon. but of the car nothing was to be seen.
for the second time robin pulled up. he took serious counsel with
himself. he estimated that he could see for about three miles along the
road. less than three minutes had elapsed since his misadventure, and
therefore he was confident that the car should yet be in sight, unless
it had left the road, for it could not have warmed up to a speed
exceeding sixty miles an hour in the time. there was no sign of the car
on the road, consequently it must have left it. robin had passed no side
roads between the scene of the accident and the second bend; therefore,
he argued, he had the car before him still. he would go on.
when he started off for the third time, it was at a brisk walking pace.
as he went he kept a sharp lookout to right and left of the road for any
trace of the car. it never occurred to him that to follow on foot a
swift car bound for an unknown destination was the maddest kind of
wild-goose chase. he was profoundly uneasy about mary, but at the same
time immeasurably angered by the trick played upon him--angered not so
much against jeekes as against the sallow-faced man whom he recognized
as its inceptor. he had no thought for anything else.
the flat dutch landscape stretched away on either side of the road. a
windmill or two, the inevitable irrigation canals with their little
sluices, and an occasional tree alone broke the monotony of the scene.
but away to the right robin noticed a clump of trees which, he surmised,
might conceivably enclose a house.
as he walked, he scrutinized the roadway for any track of a car. but on
the hard brick _pave_ wheels left no mark. the first side road he came
to was likewise paved in brick. in grave perplexity robin came to a
halt.
then his eye fell upon a puddle. it lay on the edge of the footpath
bordering the _chaussee_ about five yards beyond the turning. the soft
mud which skirted it showed the punched-out pattern of a studded tyre!
the car had not taken this side road, at any rate. it had probably
pulled over on to the footpath to pass the manure cart which robin had
met. he pushed on again valiantly.
another hundred yards brought him to a second side road. there was no
_pave_ here, but a soft sandy surface. and it bore, clearly imprinted in
the mud, the fresh tracks of a car as it had turned off the road.
breaking into a run robin followed the track down the turning. it led
him to a black gate beyond which was a twisting gravel drive fringed
with high laurels. and the gravel showed the same tyre marks as the
road.
he vaulted the gate lightly and ran up the drive. he was revolving in
his head what his next move should be. should he walk boldly into the
house and confront jeekes and his rascally looking companion or should
he first spy out the ground and try to ascertain whether mary had
arrived? he decided on the latter course.
accordingly, when an unexpected turn of the drive brought him in view of
a white porch, he left the avenue and took cover behind the laurel
bushes. walking softly on the wet grass and keeping well down behind the
laurels, he went forward parallel with the drive. it ran into a clean
courtyard with a coachhouse or garage on one side and a small green
door, seemingly a side entrance into the house, on the other.
there was no one in the courtyard and the house seemed perfectly quiet.
from his post of observation behind the laurels, robin observed that a
tall window beside the green door commanded the view across the
courtyard. he therefore retraced his steps by the way he had come. when
he was past the corner of the house, he returned to the drive and
keeping close to the bushes walked quietly into the courtyard. there,
hugging the wall, he crept round past the closed doors of the garage
until he found himself beside the tall window adjoining the green door.
the window was open a few inches at the top. from within the sound of
voices reached him. jeekes was speaking. robin recognized his rather
grating voice at once.
"... no more violence," he was saying; "first greve and now the girl. i
don't like your methods, victor ..."
very cautiously robin dropped on one knee and shuffled forward in this
position until his eyes were on a level with the window-sill. he found
himself looking into a narrow room, well lighted by a second window at
the farther end. it was apparently an office, for there was a high desk
running down the centre and a large safe occupied a prominent place
against the wall.
jeekes and the man victor stood chatting at the desk. the yellow-faced
man was grinning sardonically.
"parrish don't like your methods, i'll be bound," he retorted. "don't
you worry about the little lady, jeekes! bless your heart, i won't hurt
her unless ..."
the loud throbbing of a car at the front of the house made robin duck
his head hastily. the car, he guessed, might be round at the garage any
moment and it would not do for him to be discovered. he got clear of the
window, rose to his feet, and tiptoed round the house by the way he had
come. then he crossed the drive and regained the shelter of the laurels.
crawling along until he came level with the porch, he peeped through.
mary trevert was just entering the house.
chapter xxiv
the metamorphosis of mr. schulz
as the girl collapsed, the yellow-faced man, with an adroit movement,
whisked the handkerchief off her face and crammed it into his pocket.
then, while he supported her with one arm, with the other he thrust at
the door to close it. without paying further attention to it, he turned
and, bending down, lifted the girl without an effort off her feet and
carried her across the room to the chesterfield, upon which he laid her
at full length. then he seized her muff, which dangled from her neck by
a thin platinum chain.
suddenly he heard the door behind him creak. in a flash he remembered
that he had not heard the click of the lock as he had thrust the door
to. he was springing erect when a firm hand gripped him by the back of
the collar and pulled him away from the couch. he staggered back,
striving to regain his balance, but then a savage shove flung him head
foremost into the fireplace. he fell with a crash among the fire-irons.
but he was on his feet again in an instant.
he saw a tall, athletic-looking young man standing at the couch. he had
a remarkably square jaw; his eyes were shining and he breathed heavily.
he wore a blue serge suit which was heavily besmeared with white plaster
and the trousers were rent across one knee. straight at his throat
sprang the yellow-faced man.
something struck him halfway. the young man had waited composedly for
his coming, but as his assailant advanced, had shot out his left hand.
there was a sharp crack and the yellow-faced man, reeling, dropped face
downwards on the carpet without a sound. in his fall his foot caught a
small table on which a vase of chrysanthemums stood, and the whole thing
went over with a loud crash. he made a spasmodic effort to rise, hoisted
himself on to his knees, swayed again, and then collapsed full length on
the floor, where he lay motionless.
the sound of the fall seemed to awaken the girl. she stirred uneasily
once or twice.
"what ... what is it?" she muttered, and was still again.
bending down, the young man gathered her up in his arms and bore her out
through the door with the blue curtain, through a plainly furnished sort
of office with high desks and stools, and out by a side door into a
paved yard. there an open car was standing. the fresh air seemed to
revive the girl further. as the young man laid her on the seat, she
struggled up into a sitting position and passed her hand across her
forehead.
"what is the matter with me?" she said in a dazed voice; "i feel so
ill!"
then, catching sight of the young man as he peered into her face, she
exclaimed:
"robin!"
"thank god, you're all right, mary," said robin. "we've not got a moment
to lose. we must get away from here quick!"
he was at the bonnet cranking up the car. but the engine, chilled by the
cold air, refused to start. as he was straining at the handle, a man
dashed suddenly into the yard by the office door.
it was jeekes. the little secretary was a changed man. he still wore his
_pince-nez_. but his mild air had utterly forsaken him. his face was
livid, the eyes bulged horribly from his head, and his whole body was
trembling with emotion. in his hand he held an automatic pistol. he came
so fast that he was at the car and had covered robin with his weapon
before the other had seen him come.
mr. jeekes left robin no time to act. he called out in a voice that rang
like a pistol shot:
"hands up, mr. smartie! quick, d'you hear? put 'em up, damn you!"
slowly, defiantly the young man raised his arms above his head.
mr. jeekes stood close to the driver's seat, having prudently put the
car between himself and robin. as he stood there, his automatic levelled
at the young man, a remarkable thing happened. a black, soft surface
suddenly fell over his face and was pulled back with a brisk tug. mary
trevert, standing up in the back seat of the car, had flung her fur over
the secretary's head from behind and caught him in a noose. before mr.
jeekes could disentangle himself, robin was at his throat and had borne
him to the ground. the pistol was knocked skilfully from his hand and
fell clattering on the flags. robin pounced down on it. then for the
first time he smiled, a sunny smile that lit up his blue eyes.
"bravo, mary!" he said. "that _was_ an idea! now, then, jeekes," he
ordered, "crank up that car. and be quick about it! we want to be off!"
the little secretary was a lamentable sight. he was bleeding from a cut
on the forehead, his clothes were covered with dust, and his glasses had
been broken in his fall. peering helplessly about him, he walked to the
bonnet of the car and sullenly grasped the handle. the smile had left
robin's face, and mary noticed that he looked several times anxiously at
the office door.
and then suddenly the engine bit. handing the pistol to the girl, robin
warned her to keep the secretary covered and, leaping into the
driving-seat, turned the car into the avenue which curved round the
house.
mr. jeekes made no further show of fight. he remained standing in the
centre of the courtyard, a ludicrous, rather pathetic, figure. as the
tyres of the car gritted on the gravel of the drive, the office door was
flung open and the yellow-faced man ran out, brandishing a big revolver.
"stop!" he shouted and levelled his weapon. the car seemed to leap
forward and took the sharp turn on two wheels just as the man fired. the
bullet struck the wall of the house and sent up a shower of plaster.
before he could fire again the car was round the house and out of sight.
but as the car whizzed round the turn an instant before the yellow-faced
man fired, the girl heard a sharp cry from jeekes:
"don't, victor ...!"
the rest of the sentence was lost in the roar of the engine as the car
raced away down the drive.
they left the avenue in a splutter of wet gravel. the gate still stood
open. they wheeled furiously into the side road and regained the
_chaussee_. as yet there was no sign of pursuit. the car rocked
dangerously over the broken _pave_, so robin, after a glance behind,
steadied her down to an easier pace. mary, who looked very pale and ill,
was lying back on the back seat with her eyes closed.
they ran easily into rotterdam as, with a terrific jangle of tunes
played jerkily on the chimes, the clocks were striking two. robin slowed
down as they approached the centre of the city.
"where are you staying, mary?" he asked.
he had to repeat the question several times before she gave him the
address. then he found himself in a quandary. he was in a strange town
and did not know a word of the language so as to be able to ask the way.
however, he solved the difficulty without great trouble. he beckoned to
a newspaper boy on the square outside the bourse and, holding up a
two-gulden piece, indicated by signs that he desired him as a guide. the
boy comprehended readily enough and, springing on the footboard of the
car, brought them safely to the hotel.
robin left mary and the car in charge of the boy and went to the office
and asked to see the manager. he had decided upon the story he must
tell.
"miss trevert," he said, when the manager, a blond and suave swiss, had
presented himself, "has been to the dentist and has been rather upset by
the gas. would you get one of the maids to help her up to her room and
in the meantime telephone for a doctor. if there is an english doctor in
rotterdam, i should prefer to have him!"
the manager clicked in sympathy. he despatched a lady typist and a
chambermaid to help mary out of the car.
"for a doctor," he said, "it ees fortunate. we 'ave an english doctor
staying in ze hotel now--a sheep's doctor. he is in ze lounge. eef you
come, _hein?_"
the "sheep's doctor" proved to be a doctor off one of the big liners, a
clean-shaven, red-faced, hearty sort of person who readily volunteered
his services. as robin was about to follow him into the lift, the
manager stopped him.
"zere was a shentleman call to see mees trevert," he said, "two or three
time 'e been 'ere ... a sherman shentleman. 'e leave 'er a note ... will
you take it?"
greatly puzzled, robin greve balanced in his hands the letter which
the manager produced from a pigeon-hole. then he tore open the envelope.
dear miss trevert [he read], i was extremely
sorry to miss you this morning. directly i received
your message i called at your hotel, but, though i
have been back twice, i have not found you in.
circumstances have arisen which make it imperative that
i should see you as soon as possible. this is _most
urgent_. i will come back at four o'clock, as i cannot
get away before. do not leave the hotel _on any pretext_
until you have seen me and dulkinghorn's letter as
identification. you are in _grave danger_.
the note was signed "w. schulz."
"h'm," was robin's comment; "he writes like an englishman, anyway."
he ascertained the number of mary trevert's room and went up to her
floor in the lift. he waited in the corridor outside the room for the
doctor to emerge, and lit a cigarette to while away the time. it was not
until he had nearly finished his second cigarette that the doctor
appeared.
the doctor hesitated on seeing robin. then he stepped close up to him.
robin noticed that his red face was more flushed than usual and his eyes
were troubled.
"what's this cock-and-bull story about gas you've put up to the
manager?" he said bluntly in a low voice. "the girl's been doped with
chloroform, as well you know. you'll be good enough to come downstairs
to the manager with me ..."
robin took out his note-case and produced a card.
"that's my name," he said. "you'll see that i'm a barrister ..."
"well?" said the doctor in a non-committal voice after he had read the
card.
"i'm not surprised to hear you say that miss trevert has been doped,"
robin remarked. "i found her here in a house on the outskirts of
rotterdam in the hands of two men, one of whom is believed to be
implicated in a mysterious case of suspected murder in england. through
the part he played this morning, he has probably run his head into the
noose. but he'll have it out again if we delay an instant. i told the
manager that yarn about the dentist to avoid enquiries and waste of
time. i have here a note from some man i don't know, addressed to miss
trevert, warning her of a grave danger threatening her. it corroborates
to some extent what i have told you. here ... read it for yourself!"
he handed the doctor the note signed "w. schulz."
the doctor read it through carefully.
"what i would propose to you," said robin, "is that we two should go off
at once to this herr schulz and find out exactly what he knows. then we
can decide what action there is to be taken ..."
he paused for the doctor's reply. the latter searched robin's face with
a glance.
"i'm your man," he said shortly. "and, by the way, my name's
collingwood ... robert collingwood."
"there's a car downstairs," said robin, "and a guide to show us the way.
shall we go?"
five minutes later, under the newsboy's expert guidance, the car drew up
in front of the small clean house with the neat green door bearing the
name of "schulz." leaving the boy to mind the car, they rang the bell.
the door was opened by the fat woman in the pink print dress.
robin gave the woman his card. on it he had written "about miss
trevert." speaking in german the woman bade them rather roughly to bide
where they were, and departed after closing the front door in their
faces. she did not keep them waiting long, however, for in about a
minute she returned. herr schulz would receive the gentlemen, she said.
within, the house was spotlessly clean with that characteristic german
house odour which always seems to be a compound of cleaning material and
hot grease. up a narrow staircase, furnished in plain oil-cloth with
brass stair-rods, they went to a landing on the first floor. here the
woman motioned them back and, bending her head in a listening attitude,
knocked.
"_herein_!" cried a guttural german voice.
the room into which they entered would have been entitled to a place in
any museum for showing the mode of life of the twentieth-century
germans. with its stuffy red rep curtains, its big green majolica stove,
its heavy mahogany furniture, its oleographs of bismarck, roon, and
moltke, it might have been lifted bodily from a bourgeois house in the
fatherland.
a man was sitting at a mahogany roll-top desk as they entered. the air
in the room was thick with the fumes of the cheap dutch cigar he was
smoking. he was a sturdily built fellow with blond hair shaven so close
to the skull that at a distance he seemed to be bald.
at the sound of their entrance, he rose and faced them. when he stood
erect the sturdiness of his build became accentuated, and they saw he
was a man of medium height, but so muscular that he looked much shorter.
a pair of large tortoise-shell spectacles straddled a big beak-like
nose, and he wore a heavyish blond moustache with its points trained
upwards and outwards rather after the fashion made famous in the
fatherland by william hohenzollern. in his ill-cut suit of cheap-looking
blue serge, which he wore with a pea-green tie, robin thought he looked
altogether a typical specimen of the german of the non-commissioned
officer class.
"you ask for me?" he said in deep guttural accents, looking at robin;
"i am herr schulz!"
the german's manner was cold and formal and robin felt a little dashed.
"my name is greve," he began rather hurriedly. "i understand you
received a visit to-day from a young english lady, a miss trevert ..."
the german let his eyes travel slowly from robin to the doctor and back
again. he did not offer them a chair and all three remained standing.
"ye-es, and what if i did?"
robin felt his temper rising.
"you wrote a note to miss trevert at her hotel warning her that she was
in danger. i want to know why you warned her. what led you to suppose
that she was threatened?"
herr schulz made a little gesture of the hand.
"wass i not right to warn her?"
"indeed, you were," robin asserted with conviction. "she was spirited
away and drugged."
the german started. a frowning pucker appeared just above the bridge of
his big spectacles and he raised his head quickly.
"drugged?" he said.
"certainly," said robin. "this gentleman with me is a doctor ... dr.
robert collingwood, of the red lion line. he has examined miss trevert
and can corroborate my statement."
"by gad!" exclaimed herr schulz--and this time his english was
faultless and fluent--"shut that door behind you, mr. greve, and shoot
the bolt--that's it just below the knob! sit down, sit down, and while i
mix you a drink, you shall tell me about this!"
chapter xxv
the reading of the riddle
in uttering those words herr schulz seemed suddenly to become
loose-limbed and easy. his plethoric rigidity of manner vanished, and,
though he spoke with a brisk air of authority, there was a jovial ring
in his voice which instantly inspired confidence. with the change the
illusion supported by his appalling clothes was broken and he looked
like a man dressed up for charades.
"are you--english?" asked robin in astonishment.
"only in this room," was the dry reply, "and don't you or our friend,
the doctor, here forget it. you'll both take whisky? three fingers will
do you good, mr. greve, for i see you've had a roughish time this
morning. say when!"
he spurted a siphon into three glasses.
"before we go any farther," he went on, "perhaps i had better identify
myself--to save any further misunderstandings, don't you know? do either
of you gentlemen happen to know a party called dulkinghorn? you may have
heard of him, mr. greve, for i can see you have been in the army ..."
"not ernest dulkinghorn, of the war office?" asked robin.
"the identical party!"
"i never met him," said robin. "but i was at the war office for a bit
before i was demobilized and i heard fellows speak of him.
counter-espionage, isn't he?"
"that's right," nodded herr schulz. "you can read his letter to me
introducing miss trevert."
he handed a sheet of paper to robin.
dear schulz [it ran], victor marbran's push appear
to be connected with hartley parrish, who has
just met his death under suspicious circumstances.
you will have read about it in the english papers.
miss trevert was engaged to h.p. and has a letter
from elias van der spyck and company which she
found on parrish's desk after his death. i should say
that the marbran-parrish connection would repay investigation.
yours
e. dulkinghorn
p.s. the letter is, of course, in conventional code.
p.p.s. don't frighten the life out of the trevert
girl, you unsympathetic brute!
robin read the letter through to the end.
"then mary trevert has this letter from rotterdam which we have been
hunting for!" he cried. "have you seen it?"
herr schulz shook his head.
"miss trevert called here this morning," he said, "when i was out. she
gave her letter to frau wirth, my housekeeper, with her card and
address. frau wirth was cleaning the plate on the front door and, a
moment after miss trevert had gone, a fellow appeared and said he was a
friend of miss trevert who had made a mistake and left the wrong letter.
my housekeeper is well trained and wouldn't give the letter up. but she
made the fatal mistake of telling the fellow exactly what he wanted to
know, and that was who the letter was addressed to. 'the letter is
addressed to herr schulz,' said this excellent woman, 'and if there's
any mistake he will find it out when he opens it.' and with that she
told him to clear out. which, having got all he wanted, he was glad
enough to do!"
"what was this chap like?" asked robin.
the big man shrugged his shoulders.
"i can teach my servants discretion," he replied whimsically, "but i
can't teach 'em to use their eyes. frau wirth could remember nothing
about this fellow except that he wasn't tall and wore a brown overcoat ..."
"jeekes!" cried robin, slapping his thigh. "he must have been actually
coming away from your place when i met him ..."
"and who," asked the big man, reflectively contemplating the amber
fluid in his glass, "who is jeekes?"
in reply robin told him the story of hartley parrish's death, his
growing certainty that the millionaire had been murdered, the mysterious
letters on slatey-blue paper, and jeekes's endeavor to burke the
investigations by throwing on robin the suspicion of having driven
parrish to suicide by threats. he told of his chance meeting with jeekes
in rotterdam that morning, his adventure at the villa bergendal, his
finding and rescue of mary trevert, and their escape.
herr schulz listened attentively and without interruption until robin
had reached the end of his story.
"there's one thing you haven't explained," he said, "and that's how miss
trevert came to walk into the hands of these precious ruffians ..."
"there, perhaps, i can help you," said the doctor from behind one of
herr schulz's rank cigars; "i have it from miss trevert herself. some
one impersonating you mr.--er, ahem,--schulz--telephoned her this
morning, after she had left her letter of introduction here, asking her
to come out to lunch at your country-house. she suspected nothing and
went off in the car they sent for her ..."
"by george!" said the big man thoughtfully; "i suspected some game of
this kind when i heard of the attempt to get at that letter of
introduction. if i only could have got hold of marbran this morning ..."
"marbran!" said robin thoughtfully. "when i read dulkinghorn's letter
just now i thought i had heard that name before. of course--victor
marbran! that was it! i remember now! he knew hartley parrish in the old
days. parrish once said that marbran would do him an injury if he could.
who is marbran, sir?"
all unconsciously he paid the tribute of 'sir' to herr schulz's
undoubted habit of command.
"victor marbran," replied the big man, "is elias van der spyck & co., a
firm which made millions in the war by trading with the enemy. in every
neutral country there were, of course, firms which specialized in
importing contraband for the use of the germans, but van der spyck & co.
brought the evasion of the blockade to a fine art. they covered up their
tracks, however, with such consummate art that we could never bring
anything home to them. in fact, it was only after the armistice that we
began to learn something of the immense scope of their operations. there
was a master brain behind them. but it was never discovered. it strikes
me, however, that we are on the right track at last ..."
"by jove ...!" exclaimed robin impressively. "hartley parrish!..."
the big man raised a hand.
"_attentions!_" he interposed suavely. "the chain is not yet complete. i
wonder what this van der spyck letter of miss trevert's contained that
made victor marbran and the secretary chap so desperately anxious to get
hold of it. for you understand, don't you?" he said briskly, turning to
robin, "that they were after that and that alone. and they risked penal
servitude in this country to get it ..."
robin nodded.
"to save their necks in another," he said.
"i have the letter here," mildly remarked the doctor from his corner of
the room. "miss trevert gave it to me!"
he produced a white envelope and drew from it a folded square of
slatey-blue paper. in great excitement robin sprang forward.
"you're a downy bird, doctor, i must say," he remarked, "fancy keeping
it up your sleeve all this time!"
he eagerly took the letter, spread it out on the table, and read it
through whilst herr schulz looked over his shoulder.
"code, eh?" commented the big man, shaking his head humorously. "if it
beats dulkinghorn, it beats me!"
from his note-case robin now drew a folded square of paper identical in
colour with the letter spread out before them.
"i found this on the carpet beside parrish's body," he said. "look, it's
exactly the same paper ..."
behind the tortoise-shell spectacles the big man's eyes narrowed down to
pin-points as he caught sight of the sheet which robin unfolded and its
series of slits.
"aha!" he cried--and his voice rang out clear through the room--"the
grill, eh? well, well, to think of that!"
he took the slotted sheet of paper from robin's hands and laid it over
the letter so that it exactly covered it, edge to edge and corner to
corner. in this way the greater part of the typewriting in the letter
was covered over, and only the words appearing in the slots could be
read. and thus it was that robin greve, herr schulz, and dr.
collingwood, leaning shoulder to shoulder, read the message that came to
hartley parrish in the library at harkings....
elias van der spyck & co.
general importers
rotterdam rotterdam 25th nov.
_codes_
a.b.c.
liebler's
_personal_
dear mr. parrish,
your favour of even date to hand and contents
noted. _the last_ delivery of steel was to time but we have had
_warning_ from the railway authorities that labour troubles at the
docks are likely to delay future consignments. _if you don't_
mind we should prefer to _settle_ the question of future
delivery _by nov. 27_ as we have a board meeting on the 30th
inst. while we fully appreciate your own difficulties with
labour at home, _you_ will understand that this is a question
which we cannot afford to adjourn _sine_ _die._
yours faithfully,
pro elias van der spyck & co.
"'the last ... warning,'" robin read out, "'if you don't ... settle ...
by nov. 27 ... you ... die ...!'"
he looked up. "last saturday," he said, "was the 27th, the day that
parrish died ..."
"the grill," remarked the big man authoritatively, "is one of the oldest
dodges known to the secret service. it renders a conventional code
absolutely undecipherable as long as it is skilfully worded, as it is in
this case. you send your conventional code by one route, your key by
another. i make no doubt that this was the way in which van der spyck &
co. transacted their business with hartley parrish. they simply posted
their conventional code letters through the post in the ordinary way,
confident that there was nothing in them to catch the eye of the
censor's department. the key might be sent in half a dozen different
ways, by hand, concealed in a newspaper, in a parcel ..."
"so this," said robin, pointing at the letter, "was what caused hartley
parrish to make his will. it would lead one to suppose that it was what
induced him to commit suicide were not the presumption so strong that he
was murdered. but who killed him? was it jeekes or marbran?"
herr schulz pitched his cigar-stump into an ash-tray.
"that," he said, "is the question which i am going to ask you gentlemen
to help me answer. you will realize that legally we have not a leg to
stand on. we are in a foreign country where, without first getting a
warrant from london, we can take no steps whatever to run these fellows
in. to get the dutch police to move against these gentry in the matter
of the assault upon miss trevert would waste valuable time. and we have
to move quickly--before these two lads can get away. i therefore propose
that we start this instant for the villa bergendal and try, if we are
not too late, to force marbran or jeekes or both of them to a
confession. that done, we can hold them if possible until we can get the
dutch police to apprehend them at the instance of miss trevert. then we
can communicate with the english police. it's all quite illegal, of
course! you have a car, i think, mr. greve! you will come with us, dr.
collingwood? good! then let us start at once!"
robin intervened with a proposal that they should call _en route_ at his
hotel to see if there were any telegrams for him.
"manderton knows i am in rotterdam," he explained, "and he promised to
wire me the latest developments in the enquiry he is conducting."
"miss trevert should be fully recovered by this," put in the doctor;
"apart from a little sickness she is really none the worse for her
disagreeable experience. if there was anything you wanted to ask her ..."
"there is," said robin promptly. "her reply to one question," he
explained, turning to herr schulz, "will give us the certainty that
parrish was murdered and did not commit suicide. it will not delay us
more than five minutes to stop at her hotel in passing, we will then
call in at my place. we should be at the villa within half an hour from
now ..."
"gentlemen," said herr schulz as they prepared to go, "i know my mr.
victor marbran. you should all be armed."
robin produced the pistol he had taken from jeekes. herr schulz slipped
a browning pistol into the breast-pocket of his jacket and, producing a
long-barrelled service revolver, gave it to the doctor.
"there are three of them, i gather, counting the chauffeur," commented
the big man, pulling on his overcoat, "so we shall be equally matched."
darkness had fallen upon rotterdam and the lights from the houses made
yellow streaks in the water of the canal as the car, piloted by robin,
drove the party to mary trevert's hotel.
they found the girl, pale and anxious, in the lounge.
"well, now," cried the doctor breezily, "and how are you feeling? did
you take my advice and have some tea?"
"what has happened?" asked the girl; "i have been so anxious about you ..."
her words were addressed to the doctor, but she looked at robin.
"mary," said robin, "we are very near the truth now. but there is one
thing you can tell us. it is very important. when you heard the shot in
the library at harkings, did you notice any other sound--before or
after?"
the girl paused to think.
"there was a sort of sharp cry and a thud ..."
"i know. but was there anything else? do try and remember. it's so
important!"
the girl was silent for a moment. then she said slowly:
"yes, there was, now i come to think of it. just as i tried the door--it
was locked, you know--there was a sort of hiss, harsh and rather loud,
from the room ..."
"a sort of hiss, eh? something like a sneeze?"
"yes. only louder and ... and ... harsher!"
"now, answer me carefully! was this before or after the shot?"
"oh, before! just as i was rattling the doorhandle. the shot broke in
upon it...."
robin turned to herr schulz, who stood with a grave face by his side.
"the silencer, you see, sir!" he said. then to mary he added: "mary, we
are going off now. but we will be back within the hour and...."
"oh, robin," the girl broke in, "don't leave me alone! i don't feel safe
in this place after this morning. i'd much rather come with you...."
"mary, it's quite impossible...." robin began.
but the girl had turned to a table and taken from it her hat and fur.
"i don't care!" she exclaimed wilfully; "i'm coming anyhow. i refuse to
be left behind!"
she smiled at herr schulz as she spoke, and that gentleman's rather grim
face relaxed as he looked at her.
"i'm not sure i wouldn't say the same!" he remarked.
the upshot of it was that, despite robin's objections, mary trevert
accompanied the party. she sat on the back seat, rather flushed and
excited, between herr schulz and the doctor, while robin took the wheel
again. a few minutes' drive took them to the big hotel where robin had
booked a room. they all waited in the car whilst he went to the office.
he was back in a minute, an open telegram in his hand.
"i believe i've got in my pocket," he cried, "the actual weapon with
which hartley parrish was killed!"
and he read from the telegram:
"mastertons gunsmiths sold last july pair of browning automatics
identical with that found on parrish to jeekes who paid with parrish's
cheque."
the message was signed "manderton."
at that moment a man wearing a black bowler hat and a heavy frieze
overcoat came hurrying out of the hotel.
"mr. greve!" he cried as robin, who was back in the driving-seat, was
releasing the brake. "did you have the wire from the yard saying i was
coming?" he asked. "probably i beat the telegraph, though. i came by
air!"
then he tipped his hat respectfully at herr schulz.
"this is detective-inspector manderton, of scotland yard, sir," said
robin.
the big man beamed a smile of friendly recognition.
"mr. manderton and i are old friends," he said. "how are you,
manderton? i didn't expect you to recognize me in these duds ..."
"i'd know you anywhere, sir," said the detective with unwonted
cordiality.
"have you got your warrant, manderton?" asked herr schulz.
"aye, i have, sir," replied the detective. "and i've a colleague from
the dutch police who's going along with me to effect the arrest ..."
"jeekes, eh?"
"that's the party, sir, charged with wilful murder.... this is
commissary boomjes, of the rotterdam criminal investigation department!"
a tall man with a short black beard had approached the car. it was
decided that the whole party should proceed to the villa bergendal
immediately. manderton sat next to robin and the dutch police officer
perched himself on the footboard.
"and where did you pick _him_ up, i'd like to know?" whispered manderton
in robin's ear with a backward jerk of the head, as they glided through
the brightly lit streets.
"d'you mean the doctor?" asked robin.
"no, your other friend!"
"miss trevert had a letter to him. something in the secret service,
isn't he?"
mr. manderton snorted.
"'something in the secret service,'" he repeated disdainfully. "well, i
should say he was. if you want to know, mr. greve, he's the head!"
chapter xxvi
the figure in the doorway
the rain was coming down in torrents and the night was black as pitch
when, leaving the lights of rotterdam behind, the car swung out on to
the main road leading to the villa bergendal. thanks to a powerful
headlight, robin was able to get a good turn of speed out of her as soon
as they were clear of the city. as they slowed down at the gate in the
side road herr schulz tapped him on the shoulder.
"better leave the car here and put the lights out," he counselled. "and
miss trevert should stay if the doctor here would remain to look after
her ..."
"you think there'll be a scrap?" whispered the doctor.
"with a man like marbran," returned the chief, "you never know what may
happen ..."
"zere will be no faight," commented the dutch police officer in
lugubrious accents, "my vriends, ve are too laite ..."
but the chief insisted that mary should stay behind and the doctor
agreed to act as her escort. then in single file the party proceeded up
the drive, robin in front, then the dutchman, after him the chief, and
mr. manderton in the rear.
they walked on the grass edging the avenue. on the wet turf their feet
made no sound. when they came in view of the house, they saw it was in
darkness. no light shone in any window, and the only sound to be heard
was the melancholy patter of the rain drops on the laurel bushes. when
they saw the porch looking black before them, they left the grass and
stepped gently across the drive, the gravel crunching softly beneath
their feet. robin led the way boldly under the porch and laid a hand on
the doorknob. the door opened easily and the next moment the four men
were in the hall.
as robin moved to the wall to find the electric light switch, a torch
was silently thrust into his hand.
"better have this, sir," whispered manderton. "i have my finger on the
switch now, but we'd best wait to put the light up until we know where
they are. where do we go first?"
"into the sitting-room," robin returned.
switching the torch on and off only as he required it, he crept silently
over the heavy carpet to the door of the room in which that morning he
had come upon mary. manderton remained at the switch in the hall whilst
the other two men followed robin through the door.
the room was in darkness. it struck chill; for the fire had gone out.
the beam of the torch flitting from wall to wall showed the room to be
empty.
"i don't believe there's a soul in the house," whispered the chief to
robin.
"ve are too laite; i have said it!" muttered the dutchman.
"there is another room leading out of this," replied robin, turning the
torch on to the blue curtain covering the door leading into the office.
"we'll have a look in there and then try upstairs. manderton will give
us warning if anybody comes down ..."
so saying he drew the curtain aside and pushed open the door. instantly
a gush of cold air blew the curtain back in his face. before he could
disentangle himself the door slammed to with a crash that shook the
house.
"that's done it!" muttered the chief.
the three men stood and listened. they heard the dripping of the rain,
the soughing of the wind, but no sound of human kind came to their ears.
"the place is empty," whispered the chief. "they've cleared ..."
"it is too laite; i have said it." the dutchman spoke in a hoarse bass.
"we'll go in here, anyway," answered robin, lifting up the curtain
again. "they may have heard us and be hiding ..."
he opened the door, steadying it with his foot. the curtain flapped
wildly round them as they crossed the threshold. the broad white beam of
the electric torch swung from window to desk, from desk to safe.
"the door over there is open," exclaimed the chief; "that's the way
they've gone."
suddenly he clutched robin's arm.
"steady," he whispered, "look there ... in the doorway ... there's
somebody moving ... quick, the torch!"
the light flashed across the room, blazed for an instant on a
window-pane, then picked out a man's form swaying in the doorway. he had
his back to the room and was rocking gently to and fro with the wind
which they felt cold on their faces.
"it's only a coat and trousers hanging in the door ..." began robin.
then, with a suddenness which pained the eyes, the room was flooded with
light. the dutch detective stepped from the electric light switch and
moved to the open door.
"too laite!" he cried, shaking his head; "have i not tell you?"
suspended by a strip of coloured stuff, the body of mr. jeekes dangled
from the cross-beam of the door. the corpse oscillated in the breeze,
silhouetted against an oblong of black sky, turning this way and that,
loose, unnatural, horrible, and, as the body, twisting gently, faced the
room, it gave a glimpse of startling eyes, swollen, empurpled features,
protruding tongue.
without the least trace of emotion the black-bearded detective picked up
a rush-bottom chair and gathering up the corpse by its collar hoisted it
up without an effort so that the feet rested on the chair. then,
producing a clasp-knife, he mounted the chair and, with a vigorous
slash, cut the coloured strip which had been fastened to a staple
projecting from the brickwork above the door on the outside of the
house.
he caught the body in his arms and laid it face upwards on the matting
which covered the floor. he busied himself for an instant at the neck,
then rose with a twisted strip of coloured material in his hand.
"his braces," he remarked, "very common. the stool what he has stood
upon and knocked avay, she lies outsaide! my vriends, ve are too laite!"
the doctor, fetched in haste by manderton, examined the body. the man
had been dead, he said, for several hours. mary remained in the hall
with manderton while robin and the dutch detective went over the house.
there was no trace either of marbran or of the chauffeur. in the two
bedrooms which showed signs of occupation the beds had been made up, but
the ward-robes were empty.
"marbran's made a bolt for it," said robin, coming into the office where
he had left the chief, "and taken everything with him ..."
"i gathered as much," answered that astute gentleman, pointing at the
fireplace. a pile of charred paper filled the grate. "there's nothing
here, and i think we can wipe mr. victor marbran off the slate. i doubt
if we shall see him again. at any rate we can leave him to the tender
mercies of our black-bearded friend here. as for us, i don't really see
that there is anything more to detain us here ..."
"but," remarked robin, looking at the still figure on the floor, the
face now mercifully covered by the doctor's white handkerchief, "surely
this is a confession of guilt. has he left nothing behind in writing? no
account of the crime?"
"not a thing," responded the chief, "and i've been through every
drawer. even the safe is open ... and empty!"
"but how does it happen then," asked robin, "that marbran has legged it
while jeekes here ..."
"marbran left him in the lurch," the chief broke in decisively. "i think
that's clear. while you were upstairs with our dutch friend, i went
through the dead man's pockets. he had no money, greve, except a few
coppers and a little dutch change. he had not even got a return ticket
to london. which makes me think that master jeekes had left old england
for good."
"another thing that puzzles me," remarked robin, "is how jeekes knew
that miss trevert had a letter to you, sir? or, for a matter of that,
how he knew that she had gone to rotterdam at all?"
"that's not hard to answer," said mr. manderton, who had just entered
the room. "on sunday night jeekes rang up harkings from his club and
asked to speak to miss trevert. bude told him she had gone away. jeekes
then asked to speak to sir horace trevert, who told him that his sister
had gone to rotterdam. jeekes takes the first available train in the
morning, recognizes miss trevert on the way across, and tags her to her
hotel in rotterdam. the next morning he follows her again, shadows her
to sir ... to this gentleman's rooms, and there, as we know, contrived
by a trick to see to whom she had a letter."
"but why did he not attempt to get the letter away from her as soon as
she arrived? miss trevert never suspected jeekes. she might have shown
him the letter if he'd asked her for it ..."
the detective shook his head sagely.
"jeekes was pretty 'cute," he said. "before letting the girl know he was
in rotterdam, he wanted to find out what she wanted here and whom she
knew. remember, he had no means of knowing if the girl suspected him or
not ..."
"so he devised this trick of impersonating mr. schulz on the telephone,
eh?"
"bah!" broke in the chief; "i bet that was marbran's idea. look at
jeekes's face and tell me if you see in it any feature indicating the
bold, ingenious will to try a bluff like that. i never knew this fellow
here. but i know marbran, a resolute, undaunted type. you can take it
from me, marbran directed--jeekes merely carried out instructions. what
do you say, manderton?"
but the detective had retired into his shell again.
"if you will come to harkings with me the day after to-morrow, sir, i
shall hope to show you exactly how mr. parrish met his death ..."
"no, no, manderton," responded the chief; "i can't leave here for a bit.
there are bigger murderers than jeekes at liberty in holland to-day ..."
the detective slapped his thigh.
"i'd have laid a shade of odds," he cried merrily, "that you were
watching the gentleman at amerongen, sir ..."
"tut, tut, manderton," said the chief, raising his hand to silence the
other; "you run on too fast, my friend! i wish," he went on, changing
the subject, "i could be with you at harkings to-morrow to witness your
reconstruction of the crime, manderton. you'll go, i suppose, greve?"
"i certainly shall," answered the barrister, "i have had some experience
of criminals, but i must say i never saw one less endowed with criminal
characteristics than little jeekes. a strange character!..."
the chief laughed sardonically.
"anyway," he remarked, "he had a damn good notion of the end that
befitted him ..."
*       *       *       *       *
it was a still, starry night. the flushing boat stood out of harbour on
a calm sea. the high arc lamps threw a blue gleam over the deserted
moles and glinted in the oily swell lapping the quays. from the
fast-receding quayside the rasping of a winch echoed noisily across the
silent water. on the upper deck of the mail-boat robin greve and mary
trevert stood side by side at the rail. they had the deck to themselves.
above their heads on the bridge the captain stood immobile, a square
black figure, the helmsman at his elbow. otherwise, between the stars
and the sea, the man and the girl were alone.
thus they had stood ever since the mail-boat had cast off from the quay.
robin had made some banal attempt at conversation, urging (but without
much sincerity) that, after her experiences of the day, the girl should
go to her cabin and rest. but mary trevert had merely shaken her head
impatiently, without speaking.
presently he put his arm through hers. he felt against his wrist the
warm softness of her travelling-coat, and it seemed to him that, though
the girl made no sign, some slight answering pressure met his touch. so
they leaned upon the rail for a space watching the water fall hissing
from the vessel's side as the steamer, jarring and quivering, met the
long steady roll from the open sea.
then mary trevert spoke.
"robin," she said gently, "i owe you an apology ..."
robin greve looked at her quickly. but mary had her eyes fixed seaward
in contemplation of a distant light that flared and died with persistent
regularity.
"my dear," he answered, "i've only myself to blame. when you told me you
were going to marry hartley parrish, i should have known that you had
your reasons and that those reasons were good. i should have held my
tongue ..."
this time the girl stole a glance at him. but now he was gazing away to
the horizon where the light came and went.
"all this misunderstanding between us," he went on, "came about because
of what i said in the billiard-room that afternoon ..."
the girl shook her head resolutely.
"no," she answered, "it was my fault. i'm a proud devil, robin, and what
you said about hartley and ... and ... other women, robin, hurt and ...
and made me angry. no, no, don't apologize again. you and i are old
enough friends, my dear, to tell one another the truth. you made me
angry because what you said was true. i _was_ selling myself, selling
myself with my eyes open, too, and you've got a perfect right never to
speak to me again ..."
she did not finish the sentence but broke off. her voice died away
quaveringly. robin took her hand in his.
"dear," he said, "don't cry! it's over and done with now ..."
mary shook herself with an angry gesture.
"what's the good of telling me not to cry?" she protested tearfully;
"i've disgraced myself in my own eyes as well as in yours. if you can't
forget what i was ready to do, i never shall ..."
very gently the young man turned the girl towards him.
"i'm not such a prig as all that," he said. "we all make mistakes. you
know i understand the position you were in. parrish is dead. i shall
forget the rest ..."
slowly the girl withdrew her hands from his grasp.
"yes," she said wearily, "you will find it easy to forget!"
she drew her fur closer about her neck and turned her back on the sea.
"i must go down," she said. and waited for the man to stand aside. he
did not move and their eyes met. suddenly, like a child, she buried her
face in her arm flung out across his chest. she began to sob bitterly.
"that afternoon ... in the billiard-room ..." she sobbed, "you will
forget ... that ... too ... i suppose ..."
robin took her face in his hands, a hot, tear-stained face, and detached
it from the sheltering arm.
"my dear," he said, "i shall have to try to forget it. but i know i
shan't succeed. to the end of my life i shall remember the kiss you gave
me. but we are farther apart than ever now!"
there was a great sadness in his voice. it arrested the girl's attention
as he dropped his hands and turned back to the rail.
"why?" she said in a low voice, without looking up.
"because," replied the young man steadily, "you're rich now, mary ..."
the girl looked up quickly.
"will men ever understand women?" she cried, a new note in her voice.
she stepped forward and, putting her two hands on the young man's
shoulders, swung him round to face her.
"i'm as poor as ever i was," she said, "for hartley parrish's money is
not for me ..."
"mary!" exclaimed the young man joyfully.
"robin greve," cried the girl, "do you mean to tell me you'd stand there
thinking i'd accept money made like that ..."
but now she was in his arms. with a little fluttering sigh she yielded
to his kiss.
"oh, the man on the bridge!..." she murmured with her woman's instinct
for the conventions.
"come behind the boat, then!" commanded robin.
and in the shadow of a weather-stained davit he kissed her again.
"so you'll wait for me, after all, mary?"
"no," retorted the girl firmly. "we'll read the riot act to mother and
you must marry me at once!"
the wind blew cold from the north sea. it rattled in the rigging,
flapped the ensign standing out stiffly at the stern, and whirled the
black smoke from the steamer's funnels out into a dark aerial wake as
far as the eye could reach. with a gentle rhythmic motion the vessel
rose and fell, while the stars began to pale and faint grey shadows
appeared in the eastern sky. still the man and the girl stood by the
swaying lifeboat and talked the things that lovers say. step by step
they went over their thoughts for one another in each successive phase
of the dark tragedy through which they had passed.
"and that van der spyck letter," asked robin; "how did you get hold of
it? i've been wanting to ask you that ever since this afternoon ..."
"i found it in the library," replied the girl, "on the desk. it had got
tucked away between two letter-trays--one fits into the other, you
know."
"i wondered how jeekes had come to miss it," said robin. "but when was
this?" he added.
"on sunday afternoon."
"but what were you doing in the library?"
the girl became a little embarrassed.
"i knew mr. manderton was suspicious of you. i heard him telephoning
instructions to london to have you watched. so i thought i'd go to the
library to see if i could find anything which would show what they had
against you exactly. and i found this letter. then i noticed some one
hiding behind the curtains, and, as i had the letter in my hand, i hid
it in my dress. when i discovered that bruce wright was after it too, i
pretended i had found nothing ..."
"but, darling, why?"
"i wanted to make sure for myself why you had sent bruce wright, for i
guessed he had come from you, to look for this letter. so i thought i'd
go to rotterdam to investigate ..."
robin laughed affectionately.
"surely it would have been simpler to have given the letter to the
police ..."
mary gave him a look of indignant surprise.
"but it might have incriminated you!" she exclaimed.
at that robin kissed her again.
"will men _ever_ understand women?" he asked, looking into her tranquil
grey eyes.
chapter xxvii
an interruption from beyond
sudden frost had laid an icy finger on the gardens of harkings. the
smooth green lawns were all dappled with white and wore a pinched and
chilly look save under the big and solemn firs where the ground, warmed
by its canopy of branches and coverlet of cones, had thawed in dark
patches. the gravel walks were firm and dry; and in the rosery the bare
skeleton of the pergolas stood out in clear-cut silhouette against a
white and woolly sky.
overnight the frost had come. it had taken even the birds by surprise.
they hopped forlornly about the paths as though wondering where they
would get their breakfast. robin greve, idly watching them from the
library window, found himself contrasting the cheerful winter landscape
with the depressing conditions of the previous day. in wind and rain the
master of harkings had been laid to rest in the quiet little churchyard
of stevenish. the ceremony had been arranged in haste, as soon as the
coroner's jury had viewed the body. robin greve, that morning arrived
from rotterdam, bude, and mr. bardy the solicitor, had been the only
mourners. as robin looked out upon the wintry scene, his mind reverted
to the hurried funeral with its depressing accompaniment of gleaming
umbrellas, mud from the freshly turned clay, and dripping trees.
beneath the window of the library, its shattered pane now replaced, a
cluster of starlings whistled gaily, darting bright-eyed glances, full
of anticipation, at the closed window.
"_he_ used to give them crumbs every morning after breakfast," said
mary. "see, robin, how they are looking up! it seems a shame to
disappoint them...."
as though relieved to be quit of his dark thoughts, robin, with a glad
smile, turned to the girl. dipping his hand into his pocket, he produced
a hunk of bread and put it in her hand.
"you think of everything!" she said, smiling back at him prettily.
he pushed up the window and she crumbled the bread for the birds. he
rested one hand on her shoulder.
"he thought of everything, too," was his comment, "even down to the
birds. it's extraordinary! no detail was too small for him!..."
"he _was_ remarkable, robin," answered the girl soberly; "there was
something magnetic about his personality that made people like him.
even now that he is dead, even in spite of what we know, i can feel his
attraction still. and the whole house is impregnated with his
personality. particularly this room. don't you feel it? i don't mind
being here with you, robin, but i shouldn't like to be here alone. i was
dreadfully frightened on sunday evening when i came here. and when i saw
the curtains move ... oh! i thought my heart would stop beating! dear,
i'm glad we are giving this place up. i don't feel that i could ever be
happy here ... even with you!"
"poor devil!" said robin. and then again he said: "poor devil!"
"it was terrible ... to die like that!" replied mary.
"it was terrible for him to lose _you_!" answered the young man.
she gave his hand a little, tender squeeze, but relinquished it quickly
as the door opened.
mr. manderton was there, broad-shouldered and burly. behind came dr.
romain with a purple nose and eyes watering with the cold, horace
trevert in plain clothes, mr. bardy, the solicitor, plump, middle-aged,
and prim, with a broad, smooth-shaven face and an eyeglass on a black
silk riband. in the background loomed the large form of inspector
humphries, ruddy of cheek as of hair. lady margaret did not appear.
mr. manderton slapped his bowler hat briskly on a side table and with a
little bow to mary walked to the desk.
"now," said mr. manderton with a long, shrewd look that comprehended the
company, individually and collectively, and the entire room, "if
inspector humphries will kindly close the door, we will reconstruct the
crime in the light of the evidence we have collected."
he turned round to the desk and pulled back the chair ... hartley
parrish's empty chair.
"it is just on five o'clock on saturday evening, november 27," he began,
"and growing dark outside. mr. parrish is sitting here"--he tapped the
chair--"with all the lights in the room turned off except this one on
the desk."
here he put a large hand on the reading-lamp.
"the assumption that mr. parrish spent the afternoon, as he had spent
the morning, over papers in connection with the business of hornaway's
in which he was interested is not correct. mr. archer, one of mr.
parrish's secretaries who brought down a number of papers and letters
for mr. parrish to sign in the morning, states that as far as hornaway's
or any other office business was concerned, mr. parrish was through with
it by lunch. this is corroborated by the fact that no business papers of
this description, with the exception of one, which i am coming to
directly, were found on the desk here after mr. parrish's death. nor
were there any traces of burnt paper in or about the fire. these two
facts were established by my colleague, inspector humphries."
at this everybody turned and looked at the inspector, who blushed until
the tint of his hair positively paled by comparison with that of his
face.
"what mr. archer _did_ leave with mr. parrish, however," mr. manderton
resumed, looking round the group and emphasising the "did," "was his
will and this letter ..."--he held up a typewritten sheet of slatey-blue
paper--"which, a straightforward business communication in appearance,
was in reality a threat against his life. it was with these two
documents that mr. parrish spent the last few hours before he was found
dead in this room. a few odd papers found lying on the desk have nothing
to do with the case and may therefore be dismissed."
mr. manderton paused and then, with the deliberation which distinguished
his every movement, walked round the desk to the window.
"the fire in this room," he said, turning and facing his audience, "was
smoking. the butler will testify to this and state that mr. parrish
complained about it to him with the result that the sweep was ordered
for monday morning. owing to the smoke in the room mr. parrish opened
the window. his finger-prints were on the inside of the window-frame and
a small fragment of white paint was still adhering to one of his
finger-nails.
"the window, then, was open as it is now. mr. parrish sat at his desk,
read through his will, and wrote a letter to miss trevert informing her
that, under the will, she was left sole legatee. this letter, with the
will, was found on the desk after mr. parrish's death. presumably in
view of the threat against his life contained in this letter,"--the
detective held up the slatey-blue paper,--"mr. parrish had either in his
pocket or, as i am more inclined to think, lying on the desk in front of
him, his browning automatic pistol. this pistol was fitted with a maxim
silencer, an invention for suppressing the report of a firearm, which
was sent to mr. parrish by a friend in america some years ago and which
he kept permanently attached to the weapon."
mr. manderton came to an impressive full stop and glanced round his
circle of listeners. he gave his explanations easily and fluently, but
in a plain, matter-of-fact tone such as a police constable employs in
the witness-box. he had marshalled his facts well, and his measured
advance towards his _denouement_ was not without its effect on his
audience. dr. romain, nursing his knee on a leather settee, horace
trevert, a tall slim figure eagerly watching the detective from his
perch on the arm of the chesterfield, and robin and mary, standing, very
close together, behind the empty chair at the desk--each and every one
was listening with rapt attention. inspector humphries, propping his big
bulk uneasily against the wall near the door, was the only one who
appeared to be oblivious of the strain.
the detective walked round the desk and seated himself in the chair.
"mr. parrish is seated at the desk here," he resumed, "when his
attention is directed to the window."
and here mr. manderton raised his head and looked out towards the
frost-strewn gardens.
"maybe he hears a step, more probably he sees a face staring at him out
of the dark. very much to his surprise he recognizes jeekes, his
principal private secretary--i say to his surprise because he must have
believed jeekes, who had the week-end free, to be in london. and at
that, perhaps because he thinks he has made a mistake--in any case to
make sure--he gets up...."
the detective suited the action to the word. he pushed back the chair
and rose to his feet. they saw he held a large automatic pistol in his
hand.
"he has had this threatening letter, remember, so he takes his pistol
with him. and he reaches the window ..."
the detective was at the window now, his back to the room.
"he speaks to jeekes, angrily, maybe--the butler heard the sound of loud
voices--they have words. and then ..."
there came a knock at the library door. it was not a loud knock. it was
in reality scarcely more than a gentle tap. but it fell upon a silence
of manderton's own creating, a rapt silence following a pause which
preceded the climax of his narrative. so the discreet knocking resounded
loud and clear through the library.
"who is that? what is it?" rapped out dr. romain irritably.
"don't let any one disturb us, inspector!" called out horace trevert to
inspector humphries, who had opened the door.
bude's face appeared in the doorway. he had a short altercation with the
inspector, who resolutely interposed his massive form between the butler
and the room.
"what is it, bude?" asked robin, going to the door.
"it's a letter for miss trevert, sir!" said bude.
"well, leave it in the hall. miss trevert can't be disturbed at
present ..."
"but ... but, sir," the butler protested. then robin noticed that he was
trembling with excitement and that his features were all distraught.
"what's the matter with you, bude?" robin demanded.
humphries had stood on one side and robin now faced the butler.
"it's a letter from ... that jeekes!" faltered bude, holding out a
salver. "i know his writing, sir!"
"for miss trevert?"
robin gathered up the plain white envelope. it bore a dutch stamp. the
postmark was rotterdam. he gave the letter to mary. it was bulky and
heavy.
"for you," he said, and stood beside her while she broke the seal. by
this they had all gathered round her.
the envelope fluttered to the floor. mary was unfolding a wad of sheets
of writing-paper folded once across. she glanced at the topmost sheet,
then handed the bundle to robin.
"it's a confession!" she said.
from beyond the grave the little secretary had spoken and spoiled mr.
manderton's _denouement_.
chapter xxviii
the death of hartley parrish
"for miss trevert."
thus, in jeekes's round and flowing commercial hand, the document began:
last statement of albert edward jeekes, made at
rotterdam, this twenty-first day of january, in the
year of our lord one thousand nine hundred
and...
mr. bardy, the solicitor, to whom, by common consent, the reading of the
confession had been entrusted, raised his eyebrows, thereby letting his
eyeglass fall, and looked round at the company.
"pon my soul," he remarked, "for a man about to take his own life, our
friend seems to have been the coolest customer imaginable. look at it!
written in a firm hand and almost without an erasure. very remarkable!
very remarkable, indeed!..."
"hm!" grunted mr. manderton, "not so uncommon as you suppose, mr. bardy,
sir. hendriks, the palmers green poisoner, typed out his confession on
cream inlaid paper before dosing himself. but let's hear what the
gentleman has to tell us...."
this was the last digression. thenceforth mr. bardy read out the
confession to the end without interruption.
_for miss trevert_:
_madam_,
i slew, but i am not a murderer: i killed, but
without deliberation.
victor marbran has gone and left me to meet a
shameful death. but i cannot face the scaffold. as
men go, i do not believe i am a coward and i am not
afraid to die. but the inexorable deliberation of
justice appals me. when i have written what i have
to write, i shall be hangman to myself. my pistol
they have taken away.
victor marbran has abandoned me. he had prepared
everything for his flight. even if the law can
indict him as the virtual murderer of hartley parrish,
the law will never lay hands on him. victor marbran
neglects no detail. he will never be caught. but from
the great unknown for which i shall presently set
out, i shall stretch forth my hand and see that, here
or there, he does not escape the punishment he merits
for bringing down shame and disgrace upon me.
just now he bade me stay in the office and finish
burning the papers in his desk. he promised he would
take me with him to a secure hiding-place which he
had made ready for some such emergency as this. i believed
him and, unsuspecting, stayed. and now he
has slipped away. he is gone and the house is empty.
i cannot follow him even did i know where he has
gone. i have only a very little money left and i am
tired. very tired. i feel i cannot support the hue-and-cry
they will raise. everything is still about me.
the quiet of the country is very soothing. to die like
this, with darkness falling and no sound but the
rustling rain, is the better way ...
hartley parrish was the man behind the great
syndicate which systematically ran the british blockade
of germany in the war. he financed marbran and
the international riff-raff of profiteers with whom marbran
worked. parrish supplied the funds, often the
goods as well,--at any rate, until they tightened up
the blockade,--while marbran and the rest of the
bunch in neutral countries did the trading with the
enemy.
parrish was a deep one. i say nothing against him.
he was a kind employer to me and i played him false,
for which i have been bitterly punished. to have
swindled victor marbran--i count it as nothing
against him, for that heartless, cruel man is deserving
of no pity ...
parrish was the heart and soul, brains and muscle
of the syndicate. he lurked far in the background.
any and every trail which might possibly lead back
to him was carefully effaced. he was secure as long
as marbran and one or two other big men in the business
kept faith with him. now and then, when the
british intelligence were too hot on the trail, parrish
and marbran would give away one of the small fry
belonging to the organization and thus stave off suspicion.
they could do this in complete safety, for so
perfect was their organization that the small fry only
knew the small fry in the shallows and never the big
fish in the deep ...
but hartley parrish was in marbran's hands. they
stood or fell together. parrish knew this. but he was
a born gambler and insanely self-confident. he took a
chance with marbran. it cost him his life.
all payments were made to parrish. he was treasurer
and banker of the syndicate. money came in by
all sorts of devious routes, sometimes from as far
afield as south or central america. parrish distributed
the profits. everything was in his hands.
by the time the armistice came, the game had got
too hot. all the big fish except marbran had cleared
out with their pile. but marbran, like parrish, was
a gambler. he stuck it out and stayed on.
parrish played fair until the war was over. the
armistice, of course, put an end to the business. but
some months after the armistice a sum of l150,000
was paid to parrish through a spanish bank in settlement,
marbran told me, for petrol indirectly delivered
to the german admiralty. parrish pouched the
lot. not a penny did marbran get.
parrish and marbran were old friends. they were
young men together on the rand gold-fields in the
early days. in fact, i believe they went out to south
africa together as penniless london lads. but marbran
hated parrish, though parrish had, i believe,
been his benefactor in many ways. marbran was
fiercely envious of the other because he realized that,
starting with an equal chance, parrish had left him
far behind. everything that parrish touched prospered,
while marbran was in perpetual financial
straits. he was parrish's equal in courage, but not in
judgment.
parrish calculated that marbran would not dare to
denounce him. he had always taken the lead in their
schemes and he affected to disregard marbran altogether.
so he left the latter's letters unanswered and
laughed at his threats. he was quite sure that marbran
would never risk losing his pile by giving parrish
away, for they were, of course, both british subjects
and both in it together ...
marbran always distrusted parrish, and long before
the breach came, he picked on me to act the spy on my
employer. i, too, was born a gambler, but, like marbran,
i lacked the lucky touch which made parrish a
millionaire. speculation proved my ruin. i have often
thanked my god on my bended knees--as i shall do
again to-night before i pass over--that my insane
folly has ruined no one but myself ...
already, when hartley parrish engaged me, i was
up to the neck in speculation. up to that time, however,
i had managed to keep my head above water,
but the large salary on which parrish started me
dazzled me. i tried a flutter in oil on a much larger
scale than anything i had hitherto attempted, with the
result that one day i found myself with a debt of
nine hundred pounds to meet and no assets to meet
it with. and i was two hundred pounds in debt to
hartley parrish's petty cash account, which i kept.
it was victor marbran who came to my rescue.
parrish had sent me over to rotterdam to fetch some
papers from marbran. at this time i knew nothing of
parrish's blockade-running business. parrish never
took me into his confidence about it and the whole of
the correspondence went direct to him through a number
of secret channels with which i only gradually
became acquainted behind his back.
i had met marbran several times in london and
also at rotterdam. it had struck me that he had
formed a liking for me. on this particular visit to
rotterdam marbran took me out to dinner and encouraged
me to speak about myself. he was very
sympathetic, and this, coupled with the wine i had
taken, led me to open my heart to him. without giving
myself away, i let him understand that i was in
considerable financial difficulties, which i set down to
the high cost of living as the result of the war.
without a word of warning marbran pulled out
his cheque-book.
"how much do you want," he asked, "to put you
straight?"
nine hundred pounds, i told him.
he wrote the cheque at once there at the table. he
would advance me the money, he said, and put me
down for shares in a business in which he was interested.
it was a safe thing and profits were very high.
i could repay him at my leisure.
in this way i became a shareholder in parrish's
blockade-running syndicate. the return i was to
make was to spy on my employer and to report to
marbran the letters which parrish received and the
names of the people whom he interviewed.
of course, marbran did not propose this plan at
once. when i took leave of him that night, i remember,
i all but broke down at the thought of his
unsolicited generosity. i have had a hard life, miss
trevert, and his seeming kindness broke me all up.
but i might have known.
i cashed marbran's cheque and put back the two
hundred pounds i had taken from the petty cash account.
but i went on speculating. you see, i did
not believe marbran's story about the shares he said
he would put me down for. i thought it was a charitable
tale to spare my feelings. so i plunged once
more in the confident hope of recovering enough to
repay my debt to marbran.
a month later marbran sent me a cheque for one
hundred pounds. he said it was the balance of fifteen
hundred pounds due to me as profits on my shares
less the nine hundred pounds i owed him and five
hundred pounds for my shares. but my speculations
had by this time gone wrong again, and i was heartily
glad presently to receive a further cheque for two
hundred pounds from marbran. from that time on i
got from marbran sums varying between one hundred
and fifty pounds and five hundred pounds a month.
when marbran made me his shameful offer, i rejected
it with indignation. but i was fast in the trap.
marbran explained to me in great detail and with the
utmost candour the working of the parrish syndicate.
he let me know very plainly that i was as deeply
implicated as parrish and he. i was a shareholder;
i had received and was receiving my share of the
profits. in my distress and shame i threatened to
expose the pair of them. had i known the source of
his money, i told him, i should never have accepted it.
at that marbran laughed contemptuously.
"you tell that yarn to the police," he sneered,
"and hear what they say!"
and then i realized that i was in the net.
i make no excuses for myself. i shall make none
to the great judge before whom in a little while i
shall appear. i had not the moral force to resist marbran.
i did his bidding: i continued to take his
money and i held my peace.
and then came the breach between parrish and
marbran. i was the cause of it. but for me, his
trusty spy, marbran would have known nothing of
this payment of l150,000 which parrish received
from spain, and this tragedy would not have happened.
god forgive me ...
marbran appealed to parrish in vain. what he
wrote i never knew, for, shortly after, parrish quietly
and without any explanation took the confidential
work out of my hands. i believe he suspected then
who marbran's spy was. but he said nothing to me
of his suspicions at that time ...
finally, marbran came to london. it was on tuesday
of last week. i had been up in sheffield on business,
and on my return i found marbran waiting for
me at my rooms.
he was like a man possessed. never before have i
witnessed such an outburst of ungovernable rage. parrish,
it appears, had declined to see him. he swore
that parrish should not get the better of him if he had
to kill him first. i can see marbran now as he sat on
my bed, his livid face distorted with fury.
"i'll give him a last chance," he cried, "and then,
by god, let our smart alec look out!"
this sort of talk frightened me. i knew marbran
meant mischief. he was a bad man to cross. i was desperately
afraid he would waylay parrish and bring
down disaster on the three of us. i did my utmost to
put the idea of violence out of his mind. i begged
him to content himself with trying to frighten parrish
into paying up before trying other means.
my suggestion seemed to awaken some old memory
in marbran's mind.
"by gad, jeekes," he said, after a moment's
thought, "you've given me an idea. parrish has a
yellow streak. he's scared of a gun. i saw it once,
years ago, in a roughhouse we got into at krugersdorp
on the rand. damn it, i know how to bring the yellow
dog to heel, and i'll tell you how we'll do it ..."
he then unfolded his plan. he would send parrish
a last demand for a settlement, threatening him with
death if he did not pay up. the warning would reach
parrish on the following saturday. marbran would
contrive that he should receive it by the first post.
as soon as possible thereafter i was to go to parrish
boldly and demand his answer.
"and you'll take a gun," marbran said, peering
at me with his cunning little eyes, "and you'll show it.
and if at the sight of it you don't get the brass, then
i don't know my old pal, mister hartley parrish,
esquire!"
the proposal appalled me. i knew nothing of
hartley parrish's "yellow streak." i knew him only
as a hard and resolute man, swift in decision and ruthless
in action. whatever happened, i argued, parrish
would discharge me and there was every prospect of
his handing me over to the police as well.
marbran was deaf to my reasoning. i had nothing
to fear, he protested. parrish would collapse at the
first sign of force. and as for my losing my job, marbran
would find me another and a better one in his
office at rotterdam.
still i held out. the chance of losing my position,
even of being sent to gaol, daunted me less, i think,
than the admission to parrish of the blackly ungrateful
role i had played towards him. in the end i told
marbran to do his dirty work himself.
but i spoke without conviction. i realized that marbran
held me in a cleft stick and that he realized it,
too. he wasted no further time in argument. i knew
what i had to do, he said, and i would do it. otherwise ...
he left me in an agony of mental stress. at that
time, i swear to heaven, miss trevert, i was determined
to let marbran do his worst rather than lend
myself to this odious blackmailing trick, my own
suggestion, as i bitterly remembered. but for the rest
of the week his parting threat rang in my ears. unless
he heard by the following sunday that i had
confronted parrish and called his bluff, as he put it,
the british police should have word, not only of parrish's
activities in trading with the enemy, but of
mine as well.
it was no idle threat. parrish and marbran had
put men away before. i could give you the names ...
it is quite dark now. it must be an hour since
greve took you away. soon he will be back with the
police to arrest me and i must have finished by then,
finished with the story, finished with life ...
last week i worked at parrish's city office. i told
you how he kept me off his confidential work. on
saturday morning i went round to the house in st.
james's square to see whether marbran had really
sent his warning. archer, my colleague, who was acting
as confidential secretary in my stead, was there.
parrish was at harkings, he told me. archer was
going down by car that morning with his mail. it
included two "blue letters" which archer would, according
to orders, hand to parrish unopened.
these "blue letters," as we secretaries used to call
them, written on a striking bluish paper, were the
means by which all communications passed between
parrish and marbran on the syndicate's business.
they were drafted in conventional code and came to
parrish from all parts of europe and in all kinds of
ways. no one saw them except himself. by his strict
injunctions, they were to be opened only by himself
in person.
when archer told me that two "blue letters" had
come, i knew that marbran had kept his word. though
my mind was not made up, instinct told me i was
going to play my part ...
i could not face the shame of exposure. i was
brought up in a decent english home. to stand in
the dock charged with prolonging the sufferings of
our soldiers and sailors in order to make money was
a prospect i could not even contemplate.
i thought it all out that saturday morning as i
stood at the dressing-table in my bedroom by the open
drawer in which my automatic pistol lay. it was one
given me by parrish some years before at a time
when he thought we might be going on a trip to
rumania ...
i slipped the pistol into my pocket. i felt like a man
in a dream. i believe i went down to harkings by
train, but i have no clear recollection of the journey.
i seemed to come to my senses only when i found
myself standing on the high bank of the rosery at
harkings, looking down upon the library window.
outside in the gardens it was nearly dark, but from
the window fell a stream of subdued light. the curtains
had not been drawn and the window was open
at the bottom. parrish sat at the desk. only the desk-lamp
was lit, so that his face was in shadow, but
his two hands, stretched out on the blotter in front
of him, lay in a pool of light, and i caught the gleam
of his gold signet ring.
he was not writing or working. he seemed to be
thinking. i watched him in a fascinated sort of way.
i had never seen him sit thus idly at his desk before ...
my brain worked quite lucidly now. as i looked
at him, i suddenly realised that i had a golden opportunity
for speaking to him unobserved. the gardens
were absolutely deserted: the library wing was very
still. if he were a man to be frightened into submission,
my sudden appearance, following upon the receipt
of the threatening letter, would be likely to help
in achieving this result.
i walked softly down the steps to the window. i
stood close up to the sill.
"mr. parrish," i said, "victor marbran has sent
me for his answer."
in a flash he was on his feet.
"who's there?" he cried out in alarm.
his voice shook, and i could see his hand tremble
in the lamplight as he clutched at the desk. then i
knew that he was badly frightened, and the discovery
gave me courage.
"are you going to settle with marbran or are you
not?" i said.
at that he peered forward. all of a sudden his
manner changed.
"what in hell does this mean, jeekes?"
his voice quavered no longer. it was hard and
menacing.
but i had burnt my boats behind me now.
"it means," i answered boldly, "that you've got
to pay up. and you've got to pay up now!"
in a couple of quick strides he was round the desk
and coming at me as i stood with my chest pressing
against the window-sill. his hands were thrust in his
jacket pockets. his face was red with anger.
"you dawggorn dirty little rathole spy,"--he spat
the words at me in a low, threatening voice,--"i
guessed that lowdown skunk marbran had been getting
at some of my people!"
his voice rose in a sudden gust of passion.
"you rotten little worm! you'd try and bounce
me, would you? you've come to the wrong shop for
that, mr. spying jeekes ..."
his manner was incredibly insulting. so was the
utter contempt with which he looked at me. this
man, who had trembled with fear at the unknown, recovered
his self-control on finding that the menace
came from the menial, the hireling, he despised. i felt
the blood rush in a hot flood to my head. i lost all
self-control. i screamed aloud at him.
"there's no bounce about it this time! if you
don't pay up, you know what to expect!"
i had been holding my pistol out of his sight below
the window-ledge, but on this i swung it up and
levelled it at him.
he sprang back a pace, the colour fading on the
instant from his face, his mouth twisted awry in a
horrid paroxysm of fear. even in that subdued light
i could see that his cheeks were as white as paper.
but then in a flash his right hand went up. i saw
the pistol he held, but before i could make a movement
there was a loud, raucous hiss of air and a
bullet whistled past my ear into the darkness of the
gardens. how he missed me at that range i don't
know, but, seeing me standing there, he came at me
again with the pistol in his hand ...
and then you, miss trevert, cried out, "hartley,"
and rattled the handle of the door. your cry merged
in a deafening report. parrish, who was quite close
to me, and advancing, stopped short with a little
startled exclamation, his eyes reproachful, full of
surprise. he stood there and swayed, looking at me
all the time, then crashed backwards on the floor. and
i found myself staring at the smoking pistol in my
hand ...
it was your scream that brought me to my senses.
my mind cleared instantly. i knew i must act quickly.
the house would be alarmed directly, and before that
happened, i must be clear of the grounds. yet i
knew that before i went i must do something to make
myself safe ...
i stood at the window staring down at the dead
man. his eyes were terrible. like a suicide he looked,
i thought. and then it flashed across my mind that
only one shot had been heard and that our pistols
were identical and fired the same ammunition. the
silencer! the silencer could save me. with that
removed, the suicide theory might pass muster: at any
rate, it would delay other investigations and give me
a start ...
in a matter of a second or two i believe i thought
of everything. i did not overlook the danger of leaving
finger-prints or foot-marks about. i had not
taken off my gloves, and my boots were perfectly dry.
in climbing into the room i was most careful to see
that i did not mark the window-sill or scratch the
paintwork ...
i stood beside the body and i caught the dead man's
hand. it was fat and soft and still warm. the touch
of it made me reel with horror. i turned my face
away from his so as not to see his eyes again....
i got the silencer. parrish had shown it to me and i
knew how to detach it....
i went back through the window as carefully as i
had come in. and i pushed the window down. parrish
would have done that, i thought, if he had meant
to commit suicide. and then my nerve went. the window
frightened me. the blank glass with the silent
room beyond;--it reminded me of parrish's sightless
gaze. i turned and ran....
i did not mean to kill. as there is a god in ...
on that unfinished sentence the confession
ended.
*       *       *       *       *
mr. bardy put the bundle of manuscript down on the desk and, dropping
his eyeglass from his eye, caught it deftly and began to polish it
vigorously with his pocket handkerchief. as no one spoke, he said:
"that's all. it ends there!"
he looked round the circle of earnest faces. then horace trevert
crossed to the desk.
"robin," he said, and held out his hand, "i want to apologize. i ...
we ... behaved very badly ..."
robin grasped the boy's hand.
"not a word about that, horace, old boy," he said. "besides, mary is
putting all that right, you know!"
"she told me," replied horace; "and, robin, i'm tremendously glad!"
"mr. greve!"
robin turned to find mr. manderton, large and impressive, at his elbow.
"might i have a word with you?"
robin followed the detective across the room to the window.
mr. manderton seemed a trifle embarrassed.
"er--- mr. greve," he said, clearing his throat rather nervously, "i
should like to--er,--offer you my congratulations on the remarkably
accurate view you took of this case. i should have been able to prove to
you, i believe, but for this curious interruption, that your view and
mine practically coincided. it has been a pleasure to work with you,
sir!"
he cast a hasty glance over his shoulder at the other occupants of the
room, who were gathered round the desk.
"i'm not a society man, mr. greve," he added, "and i have a lot of work
on my hands regarding the case. so i think i'll run off now ..."
he broke off, gave robin a large hand, and, looking neither to right nor
to left, made a hurried exit from the room, taking inspector humphries
with him.
"now that we are just among ourselves"--the solicitor was speaking--"i
think i may seize the opportunity of saying a word about mr. parrish's
will. miss trevert, as you know, is made principal legatee, but i
understand from her that she does not propose to accept the inheritance.
i will not comment on this decision of hers, which does her moral sense,
at any rate, infinite credit, but i should observe that mr. parrish has
left directions for the payment of an allowance--i may say, a most
handsome allowance--to lady margaret trevert during her ladyship's
lifetime. this is a provision over which miss trevert's decision, of
course, can have no influence. i would only remark that, according to
mr. parrish's instructions, this allowance will be paid from the
dividends on a percentage of his holdings in hornaway's under the new
scheme. i have not yet had an opportunity of looking further into mr.
parrish's affairs in the light of the information which mr. greve
obtained in rotterdam, but i have reason to believe that he kept his
interest in hornaway's and his--ahem!--other activities entirely
separate. if this can be definitely established to my own satisfaction
and to yours, my dear miss trevert, i see no reason why you should not
modify your decision at least in respect of mr. parrish's interest in
hornaway's."
mary trevert looked at robin and then at the solicitor.
"no!" she said; "not a penny as far as i am concerned. with mother the
case is different. i told her last night of my decision in the matter.
she disapproves of it. that is why she is not here to-day. but my mind
is made up."
mr. bardy adjusted his eyeglass in his eye and gazed at the girl. his
face wore an expression of pain mingled with compassion.
"i will see lady margaret after lunch," he said rather stiffly.
then the door opened and bude appeared.
"luncheon is served, miss!"
he stood there, a portly, dignified figure in sober black, solemn of
visage, sonorous of voice, a living example of the triumph of
established tradition over the most savage buffetings of fate. his
enunciation was, if anything, more mellow, his demeanour more pontifical
than of yore.
bude was once more in the service of a county family.
the end
end of the project gutenberg ebook of the yellow streak, by valentine williams
*** end of this project gutenberg ebook the yellow streak ***
***** this file should be named 9974.txt or 9974.zip *****
this and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/9/9/7/9974/
produced by juliet sutherland, dave morgan and the pg
online distributed proofreading team.
updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.
creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  special rules,
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark.  project
gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission.  if you
do not charge anything for copies of this ebook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  they may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically anything with public domain ebooks.  redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.
*** start: full license ***
the full project gutenberg license
please read this before you distribute or use this work
to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "project
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).
section 1.  general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg-tm
electronic works
1.a.  by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8.
1.b.  "project gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  see
paragraph 1.c below.  there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  see paragraph 1.e below.
1.c.  the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation"
or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of project
gutenberg-tm electronic works.  nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the united states.  if an
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to project gutenberg
are removed.  of course, we hope that you will support the project
gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full project
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others.
1.d.  the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  if you are outside the united states, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other project
gutenberg-tm work.  the foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united
states.
1.e.  unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:
1.e.1.  the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  you may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.net
1.e.2.  if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the united states without paying any fees
or charges.  if you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or
1.e.9.
1.e.3.  if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  additional terms will be linked
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
1.e.4.  do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg-tm.
1.e.5.  do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg-tm license.
1.e.6.  you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  however, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other
form.  any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm
license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.
1.e.7.  do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.
1.e.8.  you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that
- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  the fee is
owed to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
project gutenberg literary archive foundation.  royalty payments
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
returns.  royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the
address specified in section 4, "information about donations to
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation."
- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm
license.  you must require such a user to return or
destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
project gutenberg-tm works.
- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
of receipt of the work.
- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works.
1.e.9.  if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark.  contact the
foundation as set forth in section 3 below.
1.f.
1.f.1.  project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the project gutenberg-tm
collection.  despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.
1.f.2.  limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right
of replacement or refund" described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
provided in paragraph 1.f.3.  you agree that the foundation, the
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
damage.
1.f.3.  limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  if you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  the person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  if you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  if the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.
1.f.4.  except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other
warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to
warranties of merchantibility or fitness for any purpose.
1.f.5.  some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  the invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
1.f.6.  indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
providing copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause.
section  2.  information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm
project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  it exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.
volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  in 2001, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations.
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see sections 3 and 4
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.
section 3.  information about the project gutenberg literary archive
foundation
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
revenue service.  the foundation's ein or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  contributions to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by u.s. federal laws and your state's laws.
the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s.
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  its business office is located at
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org
for additional contact information:
dr. gregory b. newby
chief executive and director
gbnewby@pglaf.org
section 4.  information about donations to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation
project gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the irs.
the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
states.  compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  we do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  to
send donations or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org
while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.
international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the united states.  u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.
please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate
section 5.  general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic
works.
professor michael s. hart is the originator of the project gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  for thirty years, he produced and distributed project
gutenberg-tm ebooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.
project gutenberg-tm ebooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s.
unless a copyright notice is included.  thus, we do not necessarily
keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility:
http://www.gutenberg.net
this web site includes information about project gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.
