dedication
my dear macumazahn,
it was your native name which i borrowed at the christening
of that allen who has become as well known to me as any
other friend i have. it is therefore fitting that i should
dedicate to you this, his last tale--the story of his wife,
and the history of some further adventures which befell him.
they will remind you of many an african yarn--that with the
baboons may recall an experience of your own which i did not
share. and perhaps they will do more than this. perhaps they
will bring back to you some of the long past romance of days
that are lost to us. the country of which allan quatermain
tells his tale is now, for the most part, as well known and
explored as are the fields of norfolk. where we shot and
trekked and galloped, scarcely seeing the face of civilized
man, there the gold-seeker builds his cities. the shadow of
the flag of britain has, for a while, ceased to fall on the
transvaal plains; the game has gone; the misty charm of the
morning has become the glare of day. all is changed. the
blue gums that we planted in the garden of the "palatial"
must be large trees by now, and the "palatial" itself has
passed from us. jess sat in it waiting for her love after we
were gone. there she nursed him back to life. but jess is
dead, and strangers own it, or perhaps it is a ruin.
for us too, macumazahn, as for the land we loved, the
mystery and promise of the morning are outworn; the mid-day
sun burns overhead, and at times the way is weary. few of
those we knew are left. some are victims to battle and
murder, their bones strew the veldt; death has taken some in
a more gentle fashion; others are hidden from us, we know
not where. we might well fear to return to that land lest we
also should see ghosts. but though we walk apart to-day, the
past yet looks upon us with its unalterable eyes. still we
can remember many a boyish enterprise and adventure, lightly
undertaken, which now would strike us as hazardous indeed.
still we can recall the long familiar line of the pretoria
horse, the face of war and panic, the weariness of midnight
patrols; aye, and hear the roar of guns echoed from the
shameful hill.
to you then, macumazahn, in perpetual memory of those
eventful years of youth which we passed together in the
african towns and on the african veldt, i dedicate these
pages, subscribing myself now as always,
your sincere friend,
indanda.
to arthur h. d. cochrane, esq.
allan's wife
chapter i
early days
it may be remembered that in the last pages of his diary, written just
before his death, allan quatermain makes allusion to his long dead wife,
stating that he has written of her fully elsewhere.
when his death was known, his papers were handed to myself as his
literary executor. among them i found two manuscripts, of which the
following is one. the other is simply a record of events wherein mr.
quatermain was not personally concerned--a zulu novel, the story of
which was told to him by the hero many years after the tragedy had
occurred. but with this we have nothing to do at present.
i have often thought (mr. quatermain's manuscript begins) that i would
set down on paper the events connected with my marriage, and the loss of
my most dear wife. many years have now passed since that event, and to
some extent time has softened the old grief, though heaven knows it
is still keen enough. on two or three occasions i have even begun the
record. once i gave it up because the writing of it depressed me beyond
bearing, once because i was suddenly called away upon a journey, and
the third time because a kaffir boy found my manuscript convenient for
lighting the kitchen fire.
but now that i am at leisure here in england, i will make a fourth
attempt. if i succeed, the story may serve to interest some one in after
years when i am dead and gone; before that i should not wish it to
be published. it is a wild tale enough, and suggests some curious
reflections.
i am the son of a missionary. my father was originally curate in charge
of a small parish in oxfordshire. he had already been some ten years
married to my dear mother when he went there, and he had four children,
of whom i was the youngest. i remember faintly the place where we lived.
it was an ancient long grey house, facing the road. there was a very
large tree of some sort in the garden. it was hollow, and we children
used to play about inside of it, and knock knots of wood from the rough
bark. we all slept in a kind of attic, and my mother always came and
kissed us when we were in bed. i used to wake up and see her bending
over me, a candle in her hand. there was a curious kind of pole
projecting from the wall over my bed. once i was dreadfully frightened
because my eldest brother made me hang to it by my hands. that is all
i remember about our old home. it has been pulled down long ago, or i
would journey there to see it.
a little further down the road was a large house with big iron gates to
it, and on the top of the gate pillars sat two stone lions, which
were so hideous that i was afraid of them. perhaps this sentiment was
prophetic. one could see the house by peeping through the bars of the
gates. it was a gloomy-looking place, with a tall yew hedge round it;
but in the summer-time some flowers grew about the sun-dial in the grass
plat. this house was called the hall, and squire carson lived there. one
christmas--it must have been the christmas before my father emigrated,
or i should not remember it--we children went to a christmas-tree
festivity at the hall. there was a great party there, and footmen
wearing red waistcoats stood at the door. in the dining-room, which was
panelled with black oak, was the christmas-tree. squire carson stood in
front of it. he was a tall, dark man, very quiet in his manners, and he
wore a bunch of seals on his waistcoat. we used to think him old, but
as a matter of fact he was then not more than forty. he had been, as
i afterwards learned, a great traveller in his youth, and some six
or seven years before this date he married a lady who was half a
spaniard--a papist, my father called her. i can remember her well. she
was small and very pretty, with a rounded figure, large black eyes, and
glittering teeth. she spoke english with a curious accent. i suppose
that i must have been a funny child to look at, and i know that my hair
stood up on my head then as it does now, for i still have a sketch of
myself that my mother made of me, in which this peculiarity is strongly
marked. on this occasion of the christmas-tree i remember that mrs.
carson turned to a tall, foreign-looking gentleman who stood beside
her, and, tapping him affectionately on the shoulder with her gold
eye-glasses, said--
"look, cousin--look at that droll little boy with the big brown eyes;
his hair is like a--what you call him?--scrubbing-brush. oh, what a
droll little boy!"
the tall gentleman pulled at his moustache, and, taking mrs. carson's
hand in his, began to smooth my hair down with it till i heard her
whisper--
"leave go my hand, cousin. thomas is looking like--like the
thunderstorm."
thomas was the name of mr. carson, her husband.
after that i hid myself as well as i could behind a chair, for i was
shy, and watched little stella carson, who was the squire's only child,
giving the children presents off the tree. she was dressed as father
christmas, with some soft white stuff round her lovely little face, and
she had large dark eyes, which i thought more beautiful than anything
i had ever seen. at last it came to my turn to receive a present--oddly
enough, considered in the light of future events, it was a large monkey.
stella reached it down from one of the lower boughs of the tree and
handed it to me, saying--
"dat is my christmas present to you, little allan quatermain."
as she did so her sleeve, which was covered with cotton wool, spangled
over with something that shone, touched one of the tapers and caught
fire--how i do not know--and the flame ran up her arm towards her
throat. she stood quite still. i suppose that she was paralysed with
fear; and the ladies who were near screamed very loud, but did nothing.
then some impulse seized me--perhaps instinct would be a better word to
use, considering my age. i threw myself upon the child, and, beating at
the fire with my hands, mercifully succeeded in extinguishing it before
it really got hold. my wrists were so badly scorched that they had to be
wrapped up in wool for a long time afterwards, but with the exception of
a single burn upon her throat, little stella carson was not much hurt.
this is all that i remember about the christmas-tree at the hall.
what happened afterwards is lost to me, but to this day in my sleep i
sometimes see little stella's sweet face and the stare of terror in her
dark eyes as the fire ran up her arm. this, however, is not wonderful,
for i had, humanly speaking, saved the life of her who was destined to
be my wife.
the next event which i can recall clearly is that my mother and three
brothers all fell ill of fever, owing, as i afterwards learned, to the
poisoning of our well by some evil-minded person, who threw a dead sheep
into it.
it must have been while they were ill that squire carson came one day
to the vicarage. the weather was still cold, for there was a fire in
the study, and i sat before the fire writing letters on a piece of paper
with a pencil, while my father walked up and down the room talking to
himself. afterwards i knew that he was praying for the lives of his wife
and children. presently a servant came to the door and said that some
one wanted to see him.
"it is the squire, sir," said the maid, "and he says he particularly
wishes to see you."
"very well," answered my father, wearily, and presently squire carson
came in. his face was white and haggard, and his eyes shone so fiercely
that i was afraid of him.
"forgive me for intruding on you at such a time, quatermain," he said,
in a hoarse voice, "but to-morrow i leave this place for ever, and i
wish to speak to you before i go--indeed, i must speak to you."
"shall i send allan away?" said my father, pointing to me.
"no; let him bide. he will not understand." nor, indeed, did i at the
time, but i remembered every word, and in after years their meaning grew
on me.
"first tell me," he went on, "how are they?" and he pointed upwards with
his thumb.
"my wife and two of the boys are beyond hope," my father answered, with
a groan. "i do not know how it will go with the third. the lord's will
be done!"
"the lord's will be done," the squire echoed, solemnly. "and now,
quatermain, listen--my wife's gone."
"gone!" my father answered. "who with?"
"with that foreign cousin of hers. it seems from a letter she left me
that she always cared for him, not for me. she married me because she
thought me a rich english milord. now she has run through my property,
or most of it, and gone. i don't know where. luckily, she did not care
to encumber her new career with the child; stella is left to me."
"that is what comes of marrying a papist, carson," said my father. that
was his fault; he was as good and charitable a man as ever lived, but he
was bigoted. "what are you going to do--follow her?"
he laughed bitterly in answer.
"follow her!" he said; "why should i follow her? if i met her i might
kill her or him, or both of them, because of the disgrace they have
brought upon my child's name. no, i never want to look upon her face
again. i trusted her, i tell you, and she has betrayed me. let her go
and find her fate. but i am going too. i am weary of my life."
"surely, carson, surely," said my father, "you do not mean----"
"no, no; not that. death comes soon enough. but i will leave this
civilized world which is a lie. we will go right away into the wilds, i
and my child, and hide our shame. where? i don't know where. anywhere,
so long as there are no white faces, no smooth educated tongues----"
"you are mad, carson," my father answered. "how will you live? how can
you educate stella? be a man and wear it down."
"i will be a man, and i will wear it down, but not here, quatermain.
education! was not she--that woman who was my wife--was not she highly
educated?--the cleverest woman in the country forsooth. too clever for
me, quatermain--too clever by half! no, no, stella shall be brought
up in a different school; if it be possible, she shall forget her very
name. good-bye, old friend, good-bye for ever. do not try to find me
out, henceforth i shall be like one dead to you, to you and all i knew,"
and he was gone.
"mad," said my father, with a heavy sigh. "his trouble has turned his
brain. but he will think better of it."
at that moment the nurse came hurrying in and whispered something in his
ear. my father's face turned deadly pale. he clutched at the table to
support himself, then staggered from the room. my mother was dying!
it was some days afterwards, i do not know exactly how long, that my
father took me by the hand and led me upstairs into the big room which
had been my mother's bedroom. there she lay, dead in her coffin, with
flowers in her hand. along the wall of the room were arranged three
little white beds, and on each of the beds lay one of my brothers. they
all looked as though they were asleep, and they all had flowers in their
hands. my father told me to kiss them, because i should not see them any
more, and i did so, though i was very frightened. i did not know why.
then he took me in his arms and kissed me.
"the lord hath given," he said, "and the lord hath taken away; blessed
be the name of the lord."
i cried very much, and he took me downstairs, and after that i have only
a confused memory of men dressed in black carrying heavy burdens towards
the grey churchyard!
next comes a vision of a great ship and wide tossing waters. my father
could no longer bear to live in england after the loss that had fallen
on him, and made up his mind to emigrate to south africa. we must have
been poor at the time--indeed, i believe that a large portion of
our income went from my father on my mother's death. at any rate we
travelled with the steerage passengers, and the intense discomfort of
the journey with the rough ways of our fellow emigrants still remain
upon my mind. at last it came to an end, and we reached africa, which i
was not to leave again for many, many years.
in those days civilization had not made any great progress in southern
africa. my father went up the country and became a missionary among the
kaffirs, near to where the town of cradock now stands, and here i grew
to manhood. there were a few boer farmers in the neighbourhood, and
gradually a little settlement of whites gathered round our mission
station--a drunken scotch blacksmith and wheelwright was about the most
interesting character, who, when he was sober, could quote the scottish
poet burns and the ingoldsby legends, then recently published, literally
by the page. it was from that i contracted a fondness for the latter
amusing writings, which has never left me. burns i never cared for so
much, probably because of the scottish dialect which repelled me. what
little education i got was from my father, but i never had much leaning
towards books, nor he much time to teach them to me. on the other hand,
i was always a keen observer of the ways of men and nature. by the time
that i was twenty i could speak dutch and three or four kaffir dialects
perfectly, and i doubt if there was anybody in south africa who
understood native ways of thought and action more completely than i
did. also i was really a very good shot and horseman, and i think--as,
indeed, my subsequent career proves to have been the case--a great deal
tougher than the majority of men. though i was then, as now, light and
small, nothing seemed to tire me. i could bear any amount of exposure
and privation, and i never met the native who was my master in feats
of endurance. of course, all that is different now, i am speaking of my
early manhood.
it may be wondered that i did not run absolutely wild in such
surroundings, but i was held back from this by my father's society. he
was one of the gentlest and most refined men that i ever met; even the
most savage kaffir loved him, and his influence was a very good one
for me. he used to call himself one of the world's failures. would that
there were more such failures. every morning when his work was done he
would take his prayer-book and, sitting on the little stoep or verandah
of our station, would read the evening psalms to himself. sometimes
there was not light enough for this, but it made no difference, he knew
them all by heart. when he had finished he would look out across the
cultivated lands where the mission kaffirs had their huts.
but i knew it was not these he saw, but rather the grey english church,
and the graves ranged side by side before the yew near the wicket gate.
it was there on the stoep that he died. he had not been well, and one
evening i was talking to him, and his mind went back to oxfordshire and
my mother. he spoke of her a good deal, saying that she had never been
out of his mind for a single day during all these years, and that he
rejoiced to think he was drawing near that land wither she had gone.
then he asked me if i remembered the night when squire carson came into
the study at the vicarage, and told him that his wife had run away, and
that he was going to change his name and bury himself in some remote
land.
i answered that i remembered it perfectly.
"i wonder where he went to," said my father, "and if he and his daughter
stella are still alive. well, well! i shall never meet them again. but
life is a strange thing, allan, and you may. if you ever do, give them
my kind love."
after that i left him. we had been suffering more than usual from the
depredations of the kaffir thieves, who stole our sheep at night, and,
as i had done before, and not without success, i determined to watch the
kraal and see if i could catch them. indeed, it was from this habit of
mine of watching at night that i first got my native name of macumazahn,
which may be roughly translated as "he who sleeps with one eye open." so
i took my rifle and rose to go. but he called me to him and kissed me on
the forehead, saying, "god bless you, allan! i hope that you will think
of your old father sometimes, and that you will lead a good and happy
life."
i remember that i did not much like his tone at the time, but set it
down to an attack of low spirits, to which he grew very subject as the
years went on. i went down to the kraal and watched till within an hour
of sunrise; then, as no thieves appeared, returned to the station. as i
came near i was astonished to see a figure sitting in my father's chair.
at first i thought it must be a drunken kaffir, then that my father had
fallen asleep there.
and so he had,--for he was dead!
chapter ii
the fire-fight
when i had buried my father, and seen a successor installed in his
place--for the station was the property of the society--i set to work to
carry out a plan which i had long cherished, but been unable to execute
because it would have involved separation from my father. put shortly,
it was to undertake a trading journey of exploration right through the
countries now known as the free state and the transvaal, and as much
further north as i could go. it was an adventurous scheme, for though
the emigrant boers had begun to occupy positions in these territories,
they were still to all practical purposes unexplored. but i was now
alone in the world, and it mattered little what became of me; so, driven
on by the overmastering love of adventure, which, old as i am, will
perhaps still be the cause of my death, i determined to undertake the
journey.
accordingly i sold such stock and goods as we had upon the station,
reserving only the two best waggons and two spans of oxen. the proceeds
i invested in such goods as were then in fashion, for trading purposes,
and in guns and ammunition. the guns would have moved any modern
explorer to merriment; but such as they were i managed to do a good deal
of execution with them. one of them was a single-barrelled, smooth
bore, fitted for percussion caps--a roer we called it--which threw a
three-ounce ball, and was charged with a handful of coarse black powder.
many is the elephant that i killed with that roer, although it generally
knocked me backwards when i fired it, which i only did under compulsion.
the best of the lot, perhaps, was a double-barrelled no. 12 shot-gun,
but it had flint locks. also there were some old tower muskets, which
might or might not throw straight at seventy yards. i took six kaffirs
with me, and three good horses, which were supposed to be salted--that
is, proof against the sickness. among the kaffirs was an old fellow
named indaba-zimbi, which, being translated, means "tongue of iron."
i suppose he got this name from his strident voice and exhaustless
eloquence. this man was a great character in his way. he had been a
noted witch-doctor among a neighbouring tribe, and came to the station
under the following circumstances, which, as he plays a considerable
part in this history, are perhaps worth recording.
two years before my father's death i had occasion to search the country
round for some lost oxen. after a long and useless quest it occurred
to me that i had better go to the place where the oxen were bred by a
kaffir chief, whose name i forget, but whose kraal was about fifty miles
from our station. there i journeyed, and found the oxen safe at home.
the chief entertained me handsomely, and on the following morning i went
to pay my respects to him before leaving, and was somewhat surprised to
find a collection of some hundreds of men and women sitting round him
anxiously watching the sky in which the thunder-clouds were banking up
in a very ominous way.
"you had better wait, white man," said the chief, "and see the
rain-doctors fight the lightning."
i inquired what he meant, and learned that this man, indaba-zimbi, had
for some years occupied the position of wizard-in-chief to the tribe,
although he was not a member of it, having been born in the country now
known as zululand. but a son of the chief's, a man of about thirty,
had lately set up as a rival in supernatural powers. this irritated
indaba-zimbi beyond measure, and a quarrel ensued between the two
witch-doctors that resulted in a challenge to trial by lightning being
given and accepted. these were the conditions. the rivals must await the
coming of a serious thunderstorm, no ordinary tempest would serve their
turn. then, carrying assegais in their hands, they must take their stand
within fifty paces of each other upon a certain patch of ground where
the big thunderbolts were observed to strike continually, and by the
exercise of their occult powers and invocations to the lightning, must
strive to avert death from themselves and bring it on their rival. the
terms of this singular match had been arranged a month previously,
but no storm worthy of the occasion had arisen. now the local
weather-prophets believed it to be brewing.
i inquired what would happen if neither of the men were struck, and was
told that they must then wait for another storm. if they escaped the
second time, however, they would be held to be equal in power, and be
jointly consulted by the tribe upon occasions of importance.
the prospect of being a spectator of so unusual a sight overcame my
desire to be gone, and i accepted the chief's invitation to see it
out. before mid-day i regretted it, for though the western heavens grew
darker and darker, and the still air heralded the coming of the storm,
yet it did not come. by four o'clock, however, it became obvious that
it must burst soon--at sunset, the old chief said, and in the company
of the whole assembly i moved down to the place of combat. the kraal was
built on the top of a hill, and below it the land sloped gently to the
banks of a river about half a mile away. on the hither side of the
bank was the piece of land that was, the natives said, "loved of the
lightning." here the magicians took up their stand, while the spectators
grouped themselves on the hillside about two hundred yards away--which
was, i thought, rather too near to be pleasant. when we had sat there
for a while my curiosity overcame me, and i asked leave of the chief to
go down and inspect the arena. he said i might do so at my own risk. i
told him that the fire from above would not hurt white men, and went
to find that the spot was a bed of iron ore, thinly covered with grass,
which of course accounted for its attracting the lightning from the
storms as they travelled along the line of the river. at each end of
this iron-stone area were placed the combatants, indaba-zimbi facing the
east, and his rival the west, and before each there burned a little
fire made of some scented root. moreover they were dressed in all the
paraphernalia of their craft, snakeskins, fish-bladders, and i know not
what beside, while round their necks hung circlets of baboons' teeth
and bones from human hands. first i went to the western end where
the chief's son stood. he was pointing with his assegai towards the
advancing storm, and invoking it in a voice of great excitement.
"come, fire, and lick up indaba-zimbi!
"hear me, storm devil, and lick indaba-zimbi with your red tongue!
"spit on him with your rain!
"whirl him away in your breath!
"make him as nothing--melt the marrow in his bones!
"run into his heart and burn away the lies!
"show all the people who is the true witch finder!
"let me not be put to shame in the eyes of this white man!"
thus he spoke, or rather chanted, and all the while rubbed his broad
chest--for he was a very fine man--with some filthy compound of medicine
or _mouti_.
after a while, getting tired of his song, i walked across the
iron-stone, to where indaba-zimbi sat by his fire. he was not chanting
at all, but his performance was much more impressive. it consisted in
staring at the eastern sky, which was perfectly clear of cloud, and
every now and again beckoning at it with his finger, then turning round
to point with the assegai towards his rival. for a while i looked at him
in silence. he was a curious wizened man, apparently over fifty years
of age, with thin hands that looked as tough as wire. his nose was much
sharper than is usual among these races, and he had a queer habit of
holding his head sideways like a bird when he spoke, which, in
addition to the humour that lurked in his eye, gave him a most comical
appearance. another strange thing about him was that he had a single
white lock of hair among his black wool. at last i spoke to him:
"indaba-zimbi, my friend," i said, "you may be a good witch-doctor, but
you are certainly a fool. it is no good beckoning at the blue sky while
your enemy is getting a start with the storm."
"you may be clever, but don't think you know everything, white man," the
old fellow answered, in a high, cracked voice, and with something like a
grin.
"they call you iron-tongue," i went on; "you had better use it, or the
storm devil won't hear you."
"the fire from above runs down iron," he answered, "so i keep my tongue
quiet. oh, yes, let him curse away, i'll put him out presently. look
now, white man."
i looked, and in the eastern sky there grew a cloud. at first it was
small, though very black, but it gathered with extraordinary rapidity.
this was odd enough, but as i had seen the same thing happen before it
did not particularly astonish me. it is by no means unusual in africa
for two thunderstorms to come up at the same time from different points
of the compass.
"you had better get on, indaba-zimbi," i said, "the big storm is coming
along fast, and will soon eat up that baby of yours," and i pointed to
the west.
"babies sometimes grow to giants, white man," said indaba-zimbi,
beckoning away vigorously. "look now at my cloud-child."
i looked; the eastern storm was spreading itself from earth to sky, and
in shape resembled an enormous man. there was its head, its shoulders,
and its legs; yes, it was like a huge giant travelling across the
heavens. the light of the setting sun escaping from beneath the lower
edge of the western storm shot across the intervening space in a sheet
of splendour, and, lighting upon the advancing figure of cloud, wrapped
its middle in hues of glory too wonderful to be described; but beneath
and above this glowing belt his feet and head were black as jet.
presently, as i watched, an awful flash of light shot from the head of
the cloud, circled it about as though with a crown of living fire, and
vanished.
"aha," chuckled old indaba-zimbi, "my little boy is putting on his man's
ring," and he tapped the gum ring on his own head, which natives assume
when they reach a certain age and dignity. "now, white man, unless you
are a bigger wizard than either of us you had better clear off, for the
fire-fight is about to begin."
i thought this sound advice.
"good luck go with you, my black uncle," i said. "i hope you don't feel
the iniquities of a mis-spent life weighing on you at the last."
"you look after yourself, and think of your own sins, young man," he
answered, with a grim smile, and taking a pinch of snuff, while at that
very moment a flash of lightning, i don't know from which storm, struck
the ground within thirty paces of me. that was enough for me, i took
to my heels, and as i went i heard old indaba-zimbi's dry chuckle of
amusement.
i climbed the hill till i came to where the chief was sitting with his
indunas, or headmen, and sat down near to him. i looked at the man's
face and saw that he was intensely anxious for his son's safety, and
by no means confident of the young man's powers to resist the magic of
indaba-zimbi. he was talking in a low voice to the induna next to him.
i affected to take no notice and to be concentrating my attention on
the novel scene before me; but in those days i had very quick ears, and
caught the drift of the conversation.
"hearken!" the chief was saying, "if the magic of indaba-zimbi prevails
against my son i will endure him no more. of this i am sure, that when
he has slain my son he will slay me, me also, and make himself chief in
my place. i fear indaba-zimbi. _ou!_"
"black one," answered the induna, "wizards die as dogs die, and, once
dead, dogs bark no more."
"and once dead," said the chiefs, "wizards work no more spells," and he
bent and whispered in the induna's ear, looking at the assegai in his
hand as he whispered.
"good, my father, good!" said the induna, presently. "it shall be done
to-night, if the lightning does not do it first."
"a bad look-out for old indaba-zimbi," i said to myself. "they mean to
kill him." then i thought no more of the matter for a while, the scene
before me was too tremendous.
the two storms were rapidly rushing together. between them was a gulf of
blue sky, and from time to time flashes of blinding light passed across
this gulf, leaping from cloud to cloud. i remember that they reminded
me of the story of the heathen god jove and his thunderbolts. the storm
that was shaped like a giant and ringed with the glory of the sinking
sun made an excellent jove, and i am sure that the bolts which leapt
from it could not have been surpassed even in mythological times.
oddly enough, as yet the flashes were not followed by thunder. a deadly
stillness lay upon the place, the cattle stood silently on the hillside,
even the natives were awed to silence. dark shadows crept along the
bosom of the hills, the river to the right and left was hidden in
wreaths of cloud, but before us and beyond the combatants it shone
like a line of silver beneath the narrowing space of open sky. now the
western tempest was scrawled all over with lines of intolerable light,
while the inky head of the cloud-giant to the east was continually
suffused with a white and deadly glow that came and went in pulses, as
though a blood of flame was being pumped into it from the heart of the
storm.
the silence deepened and deepened, the shadows grew blacker and blacker,
then suddenly all nature began to moan beneath the breath of an icy
wind. on sped the wind; the smooth surface of the river was ruffled by
it into little waves, the tall grass bowed low before it, and in its
wake came the hissing sound of furious rain.
ah! the storms had met. from each there burst an awful blaze of dazzling
flame, and now the hill on which we sat rocked at the noise of the
following thunder. the light went out of the sky, darkness fell suddenly
on the land, but not for long. presently the whole landscape grew vivid
in the flashes, it appeared and disappeared, now everything was visible
for miles, now even the men at my side vanished in the blackness. the
thunder rolled and cracked and pealed like the trump of doom, whirlwinds
tore round, lifting dust and even stones high into the air, and in a
low, continuous undertone rose the hiss of the rushing rain.
i put my hand before my eyes to shield them from the terrible glare,
and looked beneath it towards the lists of iron-stone. as flash followed
flash, from time to time i caught sight of the two wizards. they were
slowly advancing towards one another, each pointing at his foe with the
assegai in his hand. i could see their every movement, and it seemed to
me that the chain lightning was striking the iron-stone all round them.
suddenly the thunder and lightning ceased for a minute, everything grew
black, and, except for the rain, silent.
"it is over one way or the other, chief," i called out into the
darkness.
"wait, white man, wait!" answered the chief, in a voice thick with
anxiety and fear.
hardly were the words out of his mouth when the heavens were lit up
again till they literally seemed to flame. there were the men, not ten
paces apart. a great flash fell between them, i saw them stagger beneath
the shock. indaba-zimbi recovered himself first--at any rate when the
next flash came he was standing bolt upright, pointing with his assegai
towards his enemy. the chief's son was still on his legs, but he was
staggering like a drunken man, and the assegai had fallen from his hand.
darkness! then again a flash, more fearful, if possible, than any that
had gone before. to me it seemed to come from the east, right over the
head of indaba-zimbi. at that instant i saw the chief's son wrapped,
as it were, in the heart of it. then the thunder pealed, the rain burst
over us like a torrent, and i saw no more.
the worst of the storm was done, but for a while the darkness was so
dense that we could not move, nor, indeed, was i inclined to leave the
safety of the hillside where the lightning was never known to strike,
and venture down to the iron-stone. occasionally there still came
flashes, but, search as we would, we could see no trace of either of
the wizards. for my part, i believed that they were both dead. now the
clouds slowly rolled away down the course of the river, and with them
went the rain; and now the stars shone in their wake.
"let us go and see," said the old chief, rising and shaking the water
from his hair. "the fire-fight is ended, let us go and see who has
conquered."
i rose and followed him, dripping as though i had swum a hundred yards
with my clothes on, and after me came all the people of the kraal.
we reached the spot; even in that light i could see where the iron-stone
had been split and fused by the thunderbolts. while i was staring about
me, i suddenly heard the chief, who was on my right, give a low moan,
and saw the people cluster round him. i went up and looked. there, on
the ground, lay the body of his son. it was a dreadful sight. the hair
was burnt off his head, the copper rings upon his arms were fused, the
assegai handle which lay near was literally shivered into threads, and,
when i took hold of his arm, it seemed to me that every bone of it was
broken.
the men with the chief stood gazing silently, while the women wailed.
"great is the magic of indaba-zimbi!" said a man, at length. the chief
turned and struck him a heavy blow with the kerrie in his hand.
"great or not, thou dog, he shall die," he cried, "and so shalt thou if
thou singest his praises so loudly."
i said nothing, but thinking it probable that indaba-zimbi had shared
the fate of his enemy, i went to look. but i could see nothing of him,
and at length, being thoroughly chilled with the wet, started back to my
waggon to change my clothes. on reaching it, i was rather surprised to
see a strange kaffir seated on the driving-box wrapped up in a blanket.
"hullo! come out of that," i said.
the figure on the box slowly unrolled the blanket, and with great
deliberation took a pinch of snuff.
"it was a good fire-fight, white man, was it not?" said indaba-zimbi,
in his high, cracked voice. "but he never had a chance against me,
poor boy. he knew nothing about it. see, white man, what becomes of
presumption in the young. it is sad, very sad, but i made the flashes
fly, didn't i?"
"you old humbug," i said, "unless you are careful you will soon learn
what comes of presumption in the old, for your chief is after you with
an assegai, and it will take all your magic to dodge that."
"now you don't say so," said indaba-zimbi, clambering off the waggon
with rapidity; "and all because of this wretched upstart. there's
gratitude for you, white man. i expose him, and they want to kill me.
well, thank you for the hint. we shall meet again before long," and
he was gone like a shot, and not too soon, for just then some of the
chief's men came up to the waggon.
on the following morning i started homewards. the first face i saw on
arriving at the station was that of indaba-zimbi.
"how do you do, macumazahn?" he said, holding his head on one side and
nodding his white lock. "i hear you are christians here, and i want to
try a new religion. mine must be a bad one seeing that my people wanted
to kill me for exposing an impostor."
chapter iii
northwards
i make no apology to myself, or to anybody who may happen to read this
narrative in future, for having set out the manner of my meeting with
indaba-zimbi: first, because it was curious, and secondly, because he
takes some hand in the subsequent events. if that old man was a
humbug, he was a very clever one. what amount of truth there was in his
pretensions to supernatural powers it is not for me to determine, though
i may have my own opinion on the subject. but there was no mistake as to
the extraordinary influence he exercised over his fellow-natives. also
he quite got round my poor father. at first the old gentleman declined
to have him at the station, for he had a great horror of these kaffir
wizards or witch-finders. but indaba-zimbi persuaded him that he was
anxious to investigate the truths of christianity, and challenged him to
a discussion. the argument lasted two years--to the time of my father's
death, indeed. at the conclusion of each stage indaba-zimbi would
remark, in the words of the roman governor, "almost, praying white man,
thou persuadest me to become a christian," but he never quite became
one--indeed, i do not think he ever meant to. it was to him that my
father addressed his "letters to a native doubter." this work, which,
unfortunately, remains in manuscript, is full of wise saws and learned
instances. it ought to be published together with a _precis_ of the
doubter's answers, which were verbal.
so the talk went on. if my father had lived i believe it would be going
on now, for both the disputants were quite inexhaustible. meanwhile
indaba-zimbi was allowed to live on the station on condition that he
practised no witchcraft, which my father firmly believed to be a wile of
the devil. he said that he would not, but for all that there was never
an ox lost, or a sudden death, but he was consulted by those interested.
when he had been with us a year, a deputation came to him from the tribe
he had left, asking him to return. things had not gone well with them
since he went away, they said, and now the chief, his enemy, was
dead. old indaba-zimbi listened to them till they had done, and, as he
listened, raked sand into a little heap with his toes. then he spoke,
pointing to the little heap, "there is your tribe to-day," he said.
then he lifted his heel and stamped the heap flat. "there is your tribe
before three moons are gone. nothing is left of it. you drove me away: i
will have no more to do with you; but when you are being killed think of
my words."
the messengers went. three months afterwards i heard that the whole
community had been wiped out by an impi of raiding pondos.
when i was at length ready to start upon my expedition, i went to old
indaba-zimbi to say good-bye to him, and was rather surprised to find
him engaged in rolling up medicine, assegais, and other sundries in his
blankets.
"good-bye, indaba-zimbi," i said, "i am going to trek north."
"yes, macumazahn," he answered, with his head on one side; "and so am
i--i want to see that country. we will go together."
"will we!" i said; "wait till you are asked, you old humbug."
"you had better ask me, then, macumazahn, for if you don't you will
never come back alive. now that the old chief (my father) is gone to
where the storms come from," and he nodded to the sky, "i feel myself
getting into bad habits again. so last night i just threw up the bones
and worked out about your journey, and i can tell you this, that if you
don't take me you will die, and, what is more, you will lose one who is
dearer to you than life in a strange fashion. so just because you gave
me that hint a couple of years ago, i made up my mind to come with you."
"don't talk stuff to me," i said.
"ah, very well, macumazahn, very well; but what happened to my own
people six months ago, and what did i tell the messengers would happen?
they drove me away, and they are gone. if you drive me away you will
soon be gone too," and he nodded his white lock at me and smiled. now
i was not more superstitious than other people, but somehow old
indaba-zimbi impressed me. also i knew his extraordinary influence over
every class of native, and bethought me that he might be useful in that
way.
"all right," i said: "i appoint you witch-finder to the expedition
without pay."
"first serve, then ask for wages," he answered. "i am glad to see that
you have enough imagination not to be altogether a fool, like most white
men, macumazahn. yes, yes, it is want of imagination that makes
people fools; they won't believe what they can't understand. you can't
understand my prophecies any more than the fool at the kraal could
understand that i was his master with the lightning. well, it is time to
trek, but if i were you, macumazahn, i should take one waggon, not two."
"why?" i said.
"because you will lose your waggons, and it is better to lose one than
two."
"oh, nonsense!" i said.
"all right, macumazahn, live and learn." and without another word he
walked to the foremost waggon, put his bundle into it, and climbed on to
the front seat.
so having bid an affectionate adieu to my white friends, including the
old scotchman who got drunk in honour of the event, and quoted burns
till the tears ran down his face, at length i started, and travelled
slowly northwards. for the first three weeks nothing very particular
befell me. such kaffirs as we came in contact with were friendly, and
game literally swarmed. nobody living in those parts of south africa
nowadays can have the remotest idea of what the veldt was like even
thirty years ago.
often and often i have crept shivering on to my waggon-box just as the
sun rose and looked out. at first one would see nothing but a vast field
of white mist suffused towards the east by a tremulous golden glow,
through which the tops of stony koppies stood up like gigantic beacons.
from the dense mist would come strange sounds--snorts, gruntings,
bellows, and the thunder of countless hoofs. presently this great
curtain would grow thinner, then it would melt, as the smoke from a
pipe melts into the air, and for miles on miles the wide rolling country
interspersed with bush opened to the view. but it was not tenantless as
it is now, for as far as the eye could reach it would be literally black
with game. here to the right might be a herd of vilderbeeste that could
not number less than two thousand. some were grazing, some gambolled,
whisking their white tails into the air, while all round the old bulls
stood upon hillocks sniffing suspiciously at the breeze. there, in
front, a hundred yards away, though to the unpractised eye they looked
much closer, because of the dazzling clearness of the atmosphere, was
a great herd of springbok trekking along in single file. ah, they have
come to the waggon-track and do not like the look of it. what will they
do?--go back? not a bit of it. it is nearly thirty feet wide, but that
is nothing to a springbok. see, the first of them bounds into the air
like a ball. how beautifully the sunshine gleams upon his golden
hide! he has cleared it, and the others come after him in numberless
succession, all except the fawns, who cannot jump so far, and have to
scamper over the doubtful path with a terrified _bah_. what is that
yonder, moving above the tops of the mimosa, in the little dell at the
foot of the koppie? giraffes, by george! three of them; there will be
marrow-bones for supper to-night. hark! the ground shakes behind us, and
over the brow of the rise rush a vast herd of blesbock. on they come at
full gallop, their long heads held low, they look like so many bearded
goats. i thought so--behind them is a pack of wild dogs, their fur
draggled, their tongues lolling. they are in full cry; the giraffes hear
them and are away, rolling round the koppie like a ship in a heavy sea.
no marrow-bones after all. see! the foremost dogs are close on a buck.
he has galloped far and is outworn. one springs at his flank and misses
him. the buck gives a kind of groan, looks wildly round and sees the
waggon. he seems to hesitate a moment, then in his despair rushes up
to it, and falls exhausted among the oxen. the dogs pull up some thirty
paces away, panting and snarling. now, boy, the gun--no, not the rifle,
the shot-gun loaded with loopers.
bang! bang! there, my friends, two of you will never hunt buck again.
no, don't touch the buck, for he has come to us for shelter, and he
shall have it.
ah, how beautiful is nature before man comes to spoil it!
such a sight as this have i seen many a hundred times, and i hope to see
it again before i die.
the first real adventure that befell me on this particular journey was
with elephants, which i will relate because of its curious termination.
just before we crossed the orange river we came to a stretch of
forest-land some twenty miles broad. the night we entered this forest
we camped in a lovely open glade. a few yards ahead tambouki grass was
growing to the height of a man, or rather it had been; now, with the
exception of a few stalks here and there, it was crushed quite flat. it
was already dusk when we camped; but after the moon got up i walked from
the fire to see how this had happened. one glance was enough for me;
a great herd of elephants had evidently passed over the tall grass not
many hours before. the sight of their spoor rejoiced me exceedingly,
for though i had seen wild elephants, at that time i had never shot
one. moreover, the sight of elephant spoor to the african hunter is what
"colour in the pan" is to the prospector of gold. it is by the ivory
that he lives, and to shoot it or trade it is his chief aim in life. my
resolution was soon taken. i would camp the waggons for a while in the
forest, and start on horseback after the elephants.
i communicated my decision to indaba-zimbi and the other kaffirs. the
latter were not loth, for your kaffir loves hunting, which means plenty
of meat and congenial occupation, but indaba-zimbi would express no
opinion. i saw him retire to a little fire that he had lit for himself,
and go through some mysterious performances with bones and clay mixed
with ashes, which were watched with the greatest interest by the other
kaffirs. at length he rose, and, coming forward, informed me that it was
all right, and that i did well to go and hunt the elephants, as i should
get plenty of ivory; but he advised me to go on foot. i said i should
do nothing of the sort, but meant to ride. i am wiser now; this was
the first and last time that i ever attempted to hunt elephants on
horseback.
accordingly we started at dawn, i, indaba-zimbi, and three men; the rest
i left with the waggons. i was on horseback, and so was my driver, a
good rider and a skilful shot for a kaffir, but indaba-zimbi and the
others walked. from dawn till mid-day we followed the trail of the herd,
which was as plain as a high road. then we off-saddled to let the horses
rest and feed, and about three o'clock started on again. another hour or
so passed, and still there was no sign of elephants. evidently the herd
had travelled fast and far, and i began to think that we should have to
give it up, when suddenly i caught sight of a brown mass moving through
the thorn-trees on the side of a slope about a quarter of a mile away.
my heart seemed to jump into my mouth. where is the hunter who has not
felt like this at the sight of his first elephant?
i called a halt, and then the wind being right, we set to work to stalk
the bull. very quietly i rode down the hither side of the slope till we
came to the bottom, which was densely covered with bush. here i saw the
elephants had been feeding, for broken branches and upturned trees lay
all about. i did not take much notice, however, for all my thoughts
were fixed upon the bull i was stalking, when suddenly my horse gave
a violent start that nearly threw me from the saddle, and there came a
mighty rush and upheaval of something in front of me. i looked: there
was the hinder part of a second bull elephant not four yards off. i
could just catch sight of its outstretched ears projecting on either
side. i had disturbed it sleeping, and it was running away.
obviously the best thing to do would have been to let it run, but i was
young in those days and foolish, and in the excitement of the moment i
lifted my "roer" or elephant gun and fired at the great brute over my
horse's head. the recoil of the heavy gun nearly knocked me off the
horse. i recovered myself, however, and, as i did so, saw the bull
lurch forward, for the impact of a three-ounce bullet in the flank will
quicken the movement even of an elephant. by this time i had realized
the folly of the shot, and devoutly hoped that the bull would take
no further notice of it. but he took a different view of the matter.
pulling himself up in a series of plunges, he spun round and came for
me with outstretched ears and uplifted trunk, screaming terribly. i was
quite defenceless, for my gun was empty, and my first thought was of
escape. i dug my heels into the sides of my horse, but he would not move
an inch. the poor animal was paralyzed with terror, and he simply stood
still, his fore-legs outstretched, and quivering all over like a leaf.
on rushed the elephant, awful to see; i made one more vain effort to
stir the horse. now the trunk of the great bull swung aloft above my
head. a thought flashed through my brain. quick as light i rolled from
the saddle. by the side of the horse lay a fallen tree, as thick through
as a man's body. the tree was lifted a little off the ground by the
broken boughs which took its weight, and with a single movement, so
active is one in such necessities, i flung myself beneath it. as i did
so, i heard the trunk of the elephant descend with a mighty thud on the
back of my poor horse, and the next instant i was almost in darkness,
for the horse, whose back was broken, fell over across the tree under
which i lay ensconced. but he did not stop there long. in ten seconds
more the bull had wound his trunk about my dead nag's neck, and, with a
mighty effort, hurled him clear of the tree. i wriggled backwards as far
as i could towards the roots of the tree, for i knew what he was after.
presently i saw the red tip of the bull's trunk stretching itself
towards me. if he could manage to hook it round any part of me i was
lost. but in the position i occupied, that was just what he could not
do, although he knelt down to facilitate his operations. on came the
snapping tip like a great open-mouthed snake; it closed upon my hat,
which vanished. again it was thrust down, and a scream of rage was
bellowed through it within four inches of my head. now it seemed to
elongate itself. oh, heavens! now it had me by the hair, which, luckily
for myself, was not very long. then it was my turn to scream, for next
instant half a square inch of hair was dragged from my scalp by the
roots. i was being plucked alive, as i have seen cruel kaffir kitchen
boys pluck a fowl.
the elephant, however, disappointed with these moderate results, changed
his tactics. he wound his trunk round the fallen tree and lifted. the
tree stirred, but fortunately the broken branches embedded in the spongy
soil, and some roots, which still held, prevented it from being turned
over, though he lifted it so much that, had it occurred to him, he could
now easily have drawn me out with his trunk. again he hoisted with all
his mighty strength, and i saw that the tree was coming, and roared
aloud for help. some shots were fired close by in answer, but if they
hit the bull, their only effect was to stir his energies to more active
life. in another few seconds my shelter would be torn away, and i should
be done for. a cold perspiration burst out over me as i realized that i
was lost. then of a sudden i remembered that i had a pistol in my belt,
which i often used for despatching wounded game. it was loaded and
capped. by this time the tree was lifted so much that i could easily get
my hand down to my middle and draw the pistol from its case. i drew and
cocked it. now the tree was coming over, and there, within three feet of
my head, was the great brown trunk of the elephant. i placed the
muzzle of the pistol within an inch of it and fired. the result was
instantaneous. down sunk the tree again, giving one of my legs a
considerable squeeze, and next instant i heard a crashing sound. the
elephant had bolted.
by this time, what between fright and struggling, i was pretty well
tired. i cannot remember how i got from under the fallen tree, or indeed
anything, until i found myself sitting on the ground drinking some peach
brandy from a flask, and old indaba-zimbi opposite to me nodding
his white lock sagely, while he fired off moral reflections on the
narrowness of my escape, and my unwisdom in not having taken his advice
to go on foot. that reminded me of my horse--i got up and went to look
at it. it was quite dead, the blow of the elephant's trunk had fallen
on the saddle, breaking the framework, and rendering it useless. i
reflected that in another two seconds it would have fallen on _me_. then
i called to indaba-zimbi and asked which way the elephants had gone.
"there!" he said, pointing down the gully, "and we had better go after
them, macumazahn. we have had the bad luck, now for the good."
there was philosophy in this, though, to tell the truth, i did not feel
particularly sharp set on elephants at the moment. i seemed to have had
enough of them. however, it would never do to show the white feather
before the boys, so i assented with much outward readiness, and we
started, i on the second horse, and the others on foot. when we had
travelled for the best part of an hour down the valley, all of a sudden
we came upon the whole herd, which numbered a little more than eighty.
just in front of them the bush was so thick that they seemed to hesitate
about entering it, and the sides of the valley were so rocky and steep
at this point that they could not climb them.
they saw us at the same moment as we saw them, and inwardly i was filled
with fears lest they should take it into their heads to charge back up
the gully. but they did not; trumpeting aloud, they rushed at the thick
bush which went down before them like corn before a sickle. i do not
think that in all my experiences i ever heard anything to equal the
sound they made as they crashed through and over the shrubs and trees.
before them was a dense forest belt from a hundred to a hundred and
fifty feet in width. as they rushed on, it fell, so that behind them
was nothing but a level roadway strewed with fallen trunks, crushed
branches, and here and there a tree, too strong even for them, left
stranded amid the wreck. on they went, and, notwithstanding the nature
of the ground over which they had to travel, they kept their distance
ahead of us. this sort of thing continued for a mile or more, and then
i saw that in front of the elephants the valley opened into a space
covered with reeds and grass--it might have been five or six acres in
extent--beyond which the valley ran on again.
the herd reached the edge of this expanse, and for a moment pulled up,
hesitating--evidently they mistrusted it. my men yelled aloud, as only
kaffirs can, and that settled them. headed by the wounded bull, whose
martial ardour, like my own, was somewhat cooled, they spread out and
dashed into the treacherous swamp--for such it was, though just then
there was no water to be seen. for a few yards all went well with them,
though they clearly found it heavy going; then suddenly the great bull
sank up to his belly in the stiff peaty soil, and remained fixed. the
others, mad with fear, took no heed of his struggles and trumpetings,
but plunged on to meet the same fate. in five minutes the whole herd of
them were hopelessly bogged, and the more they struggled to escape, the
deeper they sunk. there was one exception, indeed, a cow managed to win
back to firm shore, and, lifting her trunk, prepared to charge us as we
came up. but at that moment she heard the scream of her calf, and rushed
back to its assistance, only to be bogged with the others.
such a scene i never saw before or since. the swamp was spotted all
over with the large forms of the elephants, and the air rang with their
screams of rage and terror as they waved their trunks wildly to and fro.
now and then a monster would make a great effort and drag his mass from
its peaty bed, only to stick fast again at the next step. it was a most
pitiable sight, though one that gladdened the hearts of my men. even the
best natives have little compassion for the sufferings of animals.
well, the rest was easy. the marsh that would not bear the elephants
carried our weight well enough. before midnight all were dead, for we
shot them by moonlight. i would gladly have spared the young ones and
some of the cows, but to do so would only have meant leaving them to
perish of hunger; it was kinder to kill them at once. the wounded bull i
slew with my own hand, and i cannot say that i felt much compunction in
so doing. he knew me again, and made a desperate effort to get at me,
but i am glad to say that the peat held him fast.
the pan presented a curious sight when the sun rose next morning. owing
to the support given by the soil, few of the dead elephants had fallen:
there they stood as though they were asleep.
i sent back for the waggons, and when they arrived on the morrow, formed
a camp, about a mile away from the pan. then began the work of cutting
out the elephants' tusks; it took over a week, and for obvious reasons
was a disgusting task. indeed, had it not been for the help of some
wandering bushmen, who took their pay in elephant meat, i do not think
we could ever have managed it.
at last it was done. the ivory was far too cumbersome for us to carry,
so we buried it, having first got rid of our bushmen allies. my boys
wanted me to go back to the cape with it and sell it, but i was too much
bent on my journey to do this. the tusks lay buried for five years. then
i came and dug them up; they were but little harmed. ultimately i sold
the ivory for something over twelve hundred pounds--not bad pay for one
day's shooting.
this was how i began my career as an elephant hunter. i have shot many
hundreds of them since, but have never again attempted to do so on
horseback.
chapter iv
the zulu impi
after burying the elephant tusks, and having taken careful notes of the
bearings and peculiarities of the country so that i might be able to
find the spot again, we proceeded on our journey. for a month or more
i trekked along the line which now divides the orange free state
from griqualand west, and the transvaal from bechuanaland. the
only difficulties met with were such as are still common to african
travellers--occasional want of water and troubles about crossing sluits
and rivers. i remember that i outspanned on the spot where kimberley now
stands, and had to press on again in a hurry because there was no water.
i little dreamed then that i should live to see kimberley a great
city producing millions of pounds worth of diamonds annually, and old
indaba-zimbi's magic cannot have been worth so much after all, or he
would have told me.
i found the country almost entirely depopulated. not very long before
mosilikatze the lion, chaka's general had swept across it in his
progress towards what is now matabeleland. his footsteps were evident
enough. time upon time i trekked up to what had evidently been the sites
of kaffir kraals. now the kraals were ashes and piles of tumbled stones,
and strewn about among the rank grass were the bones of hundreds of men,
women, and children, all of whom had kissed the zulu assegai. i remember
that in one of these desolate places i found the skull of a child in
which a ground-lark had built its nest. it was the twittering of the
young birds inside that first called my attention to it. shortly after
this we met with our second great adventure, a much more serious and
tragic one than the first.
we were trekking parallel with the kolong river when a herd of blesbock
crossed the track. i fired at one of them and hit it behind. it galloped
about a hundred yards with the rest of the herd, then lay down. as we
were in want of meat, not having met with any game for a few days past,
i jumped on to my horse, and, telling indaba-zimbi that i would overtake
the waggons or meet them on the further side of a rise about an hour's
trek away, i started after the wounded buck. as soon as i came within
a hundred yards of it, however, it jumped up and ran away as fast
as though it were untouched, only to lie down again at a distance. i
followed, thinking that strength would soon fail it. this happened three
times. on the third occasion it vanished behind a ridge, and, though
by now i was out of both temper and patience, i thought i might as well
ride to the crest and see if i could get a shot at it on the further
side.
i reached the ridge, which was strewn with stones, looked over it, and
saw--a zulu impi!
i rubbed my eyes and looked again. yes, there was no doubt of it. they
were halted about a thousand yards away, by the water; some were lying
down, some were cooking at fires, others were stalking about with spears
and shields in their hands; there might have been two thousand or
more of them in all. while i was wondering--and that with no little
uneasiness--what on earth they could be doing there, suddenly i heard a
wild cry to the right and left of me. i glanced first one way, then the
other. from either side a great zulu was bearing down on me, their broad
stabbing assegais aloft, and black shields in their left hands. the man
to the right was about fifteen yards away, he to the left was not more
than ten. on they came, their fierce eyes almost starting out of their
heads, and i felt, with a cold thrill of fear, that in another three
seconds those broad "bangwans" might be buried in my vitals. on such
occasions we act, i suppose, more from instinct than from anything
else--there is no time for thought. at any rate, i dropped the reins
and, raising my gun, fired point blank at the left-hand man. the bullet
struck him in the middle of his shield, pierced it, and passed through
him, and over he rolled upon the veldt. i swung round in the saddle;
most happily my horse was accustomed to standing still when i fired from
his back, also he was so surprised that he did not know which way to
shy. the other savage was almost on me; his outstretched shield reached
the muzzle of my gun as i pulled the trigger of the left barrel. it
exploded, the warrior sprung high into the air, and fell against my
horse dead, his spear passing just in front of my face.
without waiting to reload, or even to look if the main body of the zulus
had seen the death of their two scouts, i turned my horse and drove
my heels into his sides. as soon as i was down the slope of the rise i
pulled a little to the right in order to intercept the waggons before
the zulus saw them. i had not gone three hundred yards in this new
direction when, to my utter astonishment, i struck a trail marked with
waggon-wheels and the hoofs of oxen. of waggons there must have been
at least eight, and several hundred cattle. moreover, they had passed
within twelve hours; i could tell that by the spoor. then i understood;
the impi was following the track of the waggons, which, in all
probability, belonged to a party of emigrant boers.
the spoor of the waggons ran in the direction i wished to go, so i
followed it. about a mile further on i came to the crest of a rise, and
there, about five furlongs away, i saw the waggons drawn up in a rough
laager upon the banks of the river. there, too, were my own waggons
trekking down the slope towards them.
in another five minutes i was there. the boers--for boers they
were--were standing about outside the little laager watching the
approach of my two waggons. i called to them, and they turned and saw
me. the very first man my eyes fell on was a boer named hans botha, whom
i had known well years ago in the cape. he was not a bad specimen of his
class, but a very restless person, with a great objection to authority,
or, as he expressed it, "a love of freedom." he had joined a party of
the emigrant boers some years before, but, as i learned presently,
had quarrelled with its leader, and was now trekking away into the
wilderness to found a little colony of his own. poor fellow! it was his
last trek.
"how do you do, meinheer botha?" i said to him in dutch.
the man looked at me, looked again, then, startled out of his dutch
stolidity, cried to his wife, who was seated on the box of the waggon--
"come here, frau, come. here is allan quatermain, the englishman, the
son of the 'predicant.' how goes it, heer quatermain, and what is the
news down in the cape yonder?"
"i don't know what the news is in the cape, hans," i answered, solemnly;
"but the news here is that there is a zulu impi upon your spoor and
within two miles of the waggons. that i know, for i have just shot two
of their sentries," and i showed him my empty gun.
for a moment there was a silence of astonishment, and i saw the bronzed
faces of the men turn pale beneath their tan, while one or two of the
women gave a little scream, and the children crept to their sides.
"almighty!" cried hans, "that must be the umtetwa regiment that dingaan
sent against the basutus, but who could not come at them because of the
marshes, and so were afraid to return to zululand, and struck north to
join mosilikatze."
"laager up, carles! laager up for your lives, and one of you jump on a
horse and drive in the cattle."
at this moment my own waggons came up. indaba-zimbi was sitting on the
box of the first, wrapped in a blanket. i called him and told him the
news.
"ill tidings, macumazahn," he said; "there will be dead boers about
to-morrow morning, but they will not attack till dawn, then they will
wipe out the laager _so!_" and he passed his hand before his mouth.
"stop that croaking, you white-headed crow," i said, though i knew
his words were true. what chance had a laager of ten waggons all told
against at least two thousand of the bravest savages in the world?
"macumazahn, will you take my advice this time?" indaba-zimbi said,
presently.
"what is it?" i asked.
"this. leave your waggons here, jump on that horse, and let us two run
for it as hard as we can go. the zulus won't follow us, they will be
looking after the boers."
"i won't leave the other white men," i said; "it would be the act of a
coward. if i die, i die."
"very well, macumazahn, then stay and be killed," he answered, taking
a pinch of snuff. "come, let us see about the waggons," and we walked
towards the laager.
here everything was in confusion. however, i got hold of hans botha and
put it to him if it would not be best to desert the waggons and make a
run for it.
"how can we do it?" he answered; "two of the women are too fat to go
a mile, one is sick in childbed, and we have only six horses among us.
besides, if we did we should starve in the desert. no, heer allan, we
must fight it out with the savages, and god help us!"
"god help us, indeed. think of the children, hans!"
"i can't bear to think," he answered, in a broken voice, looking at his
own little girl, a sweet, curly-haired, blue-eyed child of six, named
tota, whom i had often nursed as a baby. "oh, heer allan, your father,
the predicant, always warned me against trekking north, and i never
would listen to him because i thought him a cursed englishman; now i see
my folly. heer allan, if you can, try to save my child from those black
devils; if you live longer than i do, or if you can't save her, kill
her," and he clasped my hand.
"it hasn't come to that yet, hans," i said.
then we set to work on the laager. the waggons, of which, including
my two, there were ten, were drawn into the form of a square, and the
disselboom of each securely lashed with reims to the underworks of that
in front of it. the wheels also were locked, and the space between the
ground and the bed-planks of the waggons was stuffed with branches
of the "wait-a-bit" thorn that fortunately grew near in considerable
quantities. in this way a barrier was formed of no mean strength as
against a foe unprovided with firearms, places being left for the men
to fire from. in a little over an hour everything was done that could be
done, and a discussion arose as to the disposal of the cattle, which had
been driven up close to the camp. some of the boers were anxious to get
them into the laager, small as it was, or at least as many of them as it
would hold. i argued strongly against this, pointing out that the brutes
would probably be seized with panic as soon as the firing began, and
trample the defenders of the laager under foot. as an alternative plan
i suggested that some of the native servants should drive the herd along
the valley of the river till they reached a friendly tribe or some other
place of safety. of course, if the zulus saw them they would be taken,
but the nature of the ground was favourable, and it was possible that
they might escape if they started at once. the proposition was promptly
agreed to, and, what is more, it was settled that one dutchman and such
of the women and children as could travel should go with them. in half
an hour's time twelve of them started with the natives, the boer in
charge, and the cattle. three of my own men went with the latter, the
three others and indaba-zimbi stopped with me in the laager.
the parting was a heart-breaking scene, upon which i do not care to
dwell. the women wept, the men groaned, and the children looked on with
scared white faces. at length they were gone, and i for one was thankful
of it. there remained in the laager seventeen white men, four natives,
the two boer fraus who were too stout to travel, the woman in childbed
and her baby, and hans bother's little daughter tota, whom he could not
make up his mind to part with. happily her mother was already dead. and
here i may state that ten of the women and children, together with about
half of the cattle, escaped. the zulu impi never saw them, and on the
third day of travel they came to the fortified place of a griqua chief,
who sheltered them on receiving half the cattle in payment. thence
by slow degrees they journeyed down to the cape colony, reaching a
civilized region within a little more than a year from the date of the
attack on the laager.
the afternoon was now drawing towards evening, but still there were no
signs of the impi. a wild hope struck us that they might have gone
on about their business. ever since indaba-zimbi had heard that the
regiment was supposed to belong to the umtetwa tribe, he had, i noticed,
been plunged in deep thought. presently he came to me and volunteered
to go out and spy upon their movements. at first hans botha was against
this idea, saying that he was a "verdomde swartzel"--an accursed black
creature--and would betray us. i pointed out that there was nothing to
betray. the zulus must know where the waggons were, but it was important
for us to gain information of their movements. so it was agreed that
indaba-zimbi should go. i told him this. he nodded his white lock, said
"all right, macumazahn," and started. i noticed with some surprise,
however, that before he did so he went to the waggon and fetched his
"mouti," or medicine, which, together with his other magical apparatus,
he always carried in a skin bag. i asked him why he did this. he
answered that it was to make himself invulnerable against the spears
of the zulus. i did not in the least believe his explanation, for in my
heart i was sure that he meant to take the opportunity to make a bolt
of it, leaving me to my fate. i did not, however, interfere to prevent
this, for i had an affection for the old fellow, and sincerely hoped
that he might escape the doom which overshadowed us.
so indaba-zimbi sauntered off, and as i looked at his retreating form i
thought i should never see it again. but i was mistaken, and little knew
that he was risking his life, not for the boers whom he hated one and
all, but for me whom in his queer way he loved.
when he had gone we completed our preparations for defence,
strengthening the waggons and the thorns beneath with earth and stones.
then at sunset we ate and drank as heartily as we could under the
circumstances, and when we had done, hans botha, as head of the party,
offered up prayer to god for our preservation. it was a touching sight
to see the burly dutchman, his hat off, his broad face lit up by the
last rays of the setting sun, praying aloud in homely, simple language
to him who alone could save us from the spears of a cruel foe. i
remember that the last sentence of his prayer was, "almighty, if we must
be killed, save the women and children and my little girl tota from the
accursed zulus, and do not let us be tortured."
i echoed the request very earnestly in my own heart, that i know, for in
common with the others i was dreadfully afraid, and it must be admitted
not without reason.
then the darkness came on, and we took up our appointed places each
with a rifle in his hands and peered out into the gloom in silence.
occasionally one of the boers would light his pipe with a brand from the
smouldering fire, and the glow of it would shine for a few moments on
his pale, anxious face.
behind me one of the stout "fraus" lay upon the ground. even the terror
of our position could not keep her heavy eyes from their accustomed
sleep, and she snored loudly. on the further side of her, just by the
fire, lay little tota, wrapped in a kaross. she was asleep also, her
thumb in her mouth, and from time to time her father would come to look
at her.
so the hours wore on while we waited for the zulus. but from my intimate
knowledge of the habits of natives i had little fear that they would
attack us at night, though, had they done so, they could have compassed
our destruction with but small loss to themselves. it is not the habit
of this people, they like to fight in the light of day--at dawn for
preference.
about eleven o'clock, just as i was nodding a little at my post, i heard
a low whistle outside the laager. instantly i was wide awake, and all
along the line i heard the clicking of locks as the boers cocked their
guns.
"macumazahn," said a voice, the voice of indaba-zimbi, "are you there?"
"yes," i answered.
"then hold a light so that i can see how to climb into the laager," he
said.
"yah! yah! hold a light," put in one of the boers. "i don't trust
that black schepsel of yours, heer quatermain; he may have some of
his countrymen with him." accordingly a lantern was produced and held
towards the voice. there was indaba-zimbi alone. we let him into the
laager and asked him the news.
"this is the news, white men," he said. "i waited till dark, and
creeping up to the place where the zulus are encamped, hid myself behind
a stone and listened. they are a great regiment of umtetwas as baas
botha yonder thought. they struck the spoor of the waggons three days
ago and followed it. to-night they sleep upon their spears, to-morrow at
daybreak they will attack the laager and kill everybody. they are very
bitter against the boers, because of the battle at blood river and the
other fights, and that is why they followed the waggons instead of going
straight north after mosilikatze."
a kind of groan went up from the group of listening dutchmen.
"i tell you what it is, heeren," i said, "instead of waiting to be
butchered here like buck in a pitfall, let us go out now and fall upon
the impi while it sleeps."
this proposition excited some discussion, but in the end only one man
could be found to vote for it. boers as a rule lack that dash which
makes great soldiers; such forlorn hopes are not in their line, and
rather than embark upon them they prefer to take their chance in a
laager, however poor that chance may be. for my own part i firmly
believe that had my advice been taken we should have routed the zulus.
seventeen desperate white men, armed with guns, would have produced no
small effect upon a camp of sleeping savages. but it was not taken, so
it is no use talking about it.
after that we went back to our posts, and slowly the weary night wore
on towards the dawn. only those who have watched under similar
circumstances while they waited the advent of almost certain and cruel
death, can know the torturing suspense of those heavy hours. but they
went somehow, and at last in the far east the sky began to lighten,
while the cold breath of dawn stirred the tilts of the waggons and
chilled me to the bone. the fat dutchwoman behind me woke with a yawn,
then, remembering all, moaned aloud, while her teeth chattered with
cold and fear. hans botha went to his waggon and got a bottle of peach
brandy, from which he poured into a tin pannikin, giving us each a stiff
dram, and making attempts to be cheerful as he did so. but his affected
jocularity only seemed to depress his comrades the more. certainly it
depressed me.
now the light was growing, and we could see some way into the mist which
still hung densely over the river, and now--ah! there it was. from the
other side of the hill, a thousand yards or more from the laager, came
a faint humming sound. it grew and grew till it gathered to a chant--the
awful war chant of the zulus. soon i could catch the words. they were
simple enough:
"we shall slay, we shall slay! is it not so, my brothers? our spears
shall blush blood-red. is it not so, my brothers? for we are the
sucklings of chaka, blood is our milk, my brothers. awake, children
of the umtetwa, awake! the vulture wheels, the jackal sniffs the air;
awake, children of the umtetwa--cry aloud, ye ringed men: there is
the foe, we shall slay them. is it not so, my brothers? _s'gee! s'gee!
s'gee!_"
such is a rough translation of that hateful chant which to this very day
i often seem to hear. it does not look particularly imposing on paper,
but if, while he waited to be killed, the reader could have heard it
as it rolled through the still air from the throats of nearly three
thousand warriors singing all to time, he would have found it impressive
enough.
now the shields began to appear over the brow of the rise. they came
by companies, each company about ninety strong. altogether there were
thirty-one companies. i counted them. when all were over they formed
themselves into a triple line, then trotted down the slope towards us.
at a distance of a hundred and fifty yards or just out of the shot of
such guns as we had in those days, they halted and began singing again--
"yonder is the kraal of the white man--a little kraal, my
brothers;
we shall eat it up, we shall trample it flat, my brothers.
but where are the white man's cattle--where are his oxen, my
brothers?"
this question seemed to puzzle them a good deal, for they sang the song
again and again. at last a herald came forward, a great man with ivory
rings about his arm, and, putting his hands to his mouth, called out to
us asking where our cattle were.
hans botha climbed on to the top of a waggon and roared out that they
might answer that question themselves.
then the herald called again, saying that he saw the cattle had been
sent away.
"we shall go and find the cattle," he said, "then we shall come and kill
you, because without cattle you must stop where you are, but if we wait
to kill you before we get the cattle, they may have trekked too far for
us to follow. and if you try to run away we shall easily catch you white
men!"
this struck me as a very odd speech, for the zulus generally attack an
enemy first and take his cattle afterwards; still, there was a certain
amount of plausibility about it. while i was still wondering what it
all might mean, the zulus began to run past us in companies towards the
river. suddenly a shout announced that they had found the spoor of the
cattle, and the whole impi of them started down it at a run till they
vanished over a rise about a quarter of a mile away.
we waited for half an hour or more, but nothing could we see of them.
"now i wonder if the devils have really gone," said hans botha to me.
"it is very strange."
"i will go and see," said indaba-zimbi, "if you will come with me,
macumazahn. we can creep to the top of the ridge and look over."
at first i hesitated, but curiosity overcame me. i was young in those
days and weary with suspense.
"very well," i said, "we will go."
so we started. i had my elephant gun and ammunition. indaba-zimbi had
his medicine bag and an assegai. we crept to the top of the rise like
sportsmen stalking a buck. the slope on the other side was strewn with
rocks, among which grew bushes and tall grass.
"they must have gone down the donga," i said to indaba-zimbi, "i can't
see one of them."
as i spoke there came a roar of men all round me. from every rock, from
every tuft of grass rose a zulu warrior. before i could turn, before i
could lift a gun, i was seized and thrown.
"hold him! hold the white spirit fast!" cried a voice. "hold him, or
he will slip away like a snake. don't hurt him, but hold him fast. let
indaba-zimbi walk by his side."
i turned on indaba-zimbi. "you black devil, you have betrayed me!" i
cried.
"wait and see, macumazahn," he answered, coolly. "now the fight is going
to begin."
chapter v
the end of the laager
i gasped with wonder and rage. what did that scoundrel indaba-zimbi
mean? why had i been drawn out of the laager and seized, and why, being
seized, was i not instantly killed? they called me the "white spirit."
could it be that they were keeping me to make me into medicine? i had
heard of such things being done by zulus and kindred tribes, and my
blood ran cold at the thought. what an end! to be pounded up, made
medicine of, and eaten!
however, i had little time for further reflection, for now the whole
impi was pouring back from the donga and river-banks where it had hidden
while their ruse was carried out, and once more formed up on the side
of the slope. i was taken to the crest of the slope and placed in the
centre of the reserve line in the especial charge of a huge zulu named
bombyane, the same man who had come forward as a herald. this brute
seemed to regard me with an affectionate curiosity. now and again he
poked me in the ribs with the handle of his assegai, as though to assure
himself that i was solid, and several times he asked me to be so good
as to prophesy how many zulus would be killed before the "amaboona," as
they called the boers, were "eaten up."
at first i took no notice of him beyond scowling, but presently, goaded
into anger, i prophesied that he would be dead in an hour!
he only laughed aloud. "oh! white spirit," he said, "is it so? well,
i've walked a long way from zululand, and shall be glad of a rest."
and he got it shortly, as will be seen.
now the zulus began to sing again--
"we have caught the white spirit, my brother! my brother!
iron-tongue whispered of him, he smelt him out, my brother.
now the maboona are ours--they are already dead, my brother."
so that treacherous villain indaba-zimbi had betrayed me. suddenly the
chief of the impi, a grey-haired man named sususa, held up his assegai,
and instantly there was silence. then he spoke to some indunas who stood
near him. instantly they ran to the right and left down the first
line, saying a word to the captain of each company as they passed
him. presently they were at the respective ends of the line, and
simultaneously held up their spears. as they did so, with an awful
roar of "bulala amaboona"--"slay the boers," the entire line, numbering
nearly a thousand men, bounded forward like a buck startled from its
form, and rushed down upon the little laager. it was a splendid sight
to see them, their assegais glittering in the sunlight as they rose and
fell above their black shields, their war-plumes bending back upon the
wind, and their fierce faces set intently on the foe, while the solid
earth shook beneath the thunder of their rushing feet. i thought of my
poor friends the dutchmen, and trembled. what chance had they against so
many?
now the zulus, running in the shape of a bow so as to wrap the laager
round on three sides, were within seventy yards, and now from every
waggon broke tongues of fire. over rolled a number of the umtetwa,
but the rest cared little. forward they sped straight to the laager,
striving to force a way in. but the boers plied them with volley after
volley, and, packed as the zulus were, the elephant guns loaded with
slugs and small shot did frightful execution. only one man even got on
to a waggon, and as he did so i saw a boer woman strike him on the head
with an axe. he fell down, and slowly, amid howls of derision from the
two lines on the hill-side, the zulus drew back.
"let us go, father!" shouted the soldiers on the slope, among whom i
was, to their chief, who had come up. "you have sent out the little
girls to fight, and they are frightened. let us show them the way."
"no, no!" the chief sususa answered, laughing. "wait a minute and the
little girls will grow to women, and women are good enough to fight
against boers!"
the attacking zulus heard the mockery of their fellows, and rushed
forward again with a roar. but the boers in the laager had found time to
load, and they met with a warm reception. reserving their fire till the
zulus were packed like sheep in a kraal, they loosed into them with the
roers, and the warriors fell in little heaps. but i saw that the blood
of the umtetwas was up; they did not mean to be beaten back this time,
and the end was near. see! six men had leapt on to a waggon, slain the
man behind it, and sprung into the laager. they were killed there, but
others followed, and then i turned my head. but i could not shut my ears
to the cries of rage and death, and the terrible _s'gee! s'gee!_ of the
savages as they did their work of murder. once only i looked up and saw
poor hans botha standing on a waggon smiting down men with the butt of
his rifle. the assegais shot up towards him like tongues of steel, and
when i looked again he was gone.
i turned sick with fear and rage. but alas! what could i do? they were
all dead now, and probably my own turn was coming, only my death with
not be so swift.
the fight was ended, and the two lines on the slope broke their order,
and moved down to the laager. presently we were there, and a dreadful
sight it was. many of the attacking zulus were dead--quite fifty i
should say, and at least a hundred and fifty were wounded, some of them
mortally. the chief sususa gave an order, the dead men were picked up
and piled in a heap, while those who were slightly hurt walked off to
find some one to tie up their wounds. but the more serious cases met
with a different treatment. the chief or one of his indunas considered
each case, and if it was in any way bad, the man was taken up and thrown
into the river which ran near. none of them offered any objection,
though one poor fellow swam to shore again. he did not stop there long,
however, for they pushed him back and drowned him by force.
the strangest case of all was that of the chief's own brother. he had
been captain of the line, and his ankle was smashed by a bullet. sususa
came up to him, and, having examined the wound, rated him soundly for
failing in the first onslaught.
the poor fellow made the excuse that it was not his fault, as the boers
had hit him in the first rush. his brother admitted the truth of this,
and talked to him amicably.
"well," he said at length, offering him a pinch of snuff, "you cannot
walk again."
"no, chief," said the wounded man, looking at his ankle.
"and to-morrow we must walk far," went on sususa.
"yes, chief."
"say, then, will you sit here on the veldt, or----" and he nodded
towards the river.
the man dropped his head on his breast for a minute as though in
thought. presently he lifted it and looked sususa straight in the face.
"my ankle pains me, my brother," he said; "i think i will go back to
zululand, for there is the only kraal i wish to see again, even if i
creep about it like a snake."[*]
[*] the zulus believe that after death their spirits enter
into the bodies of large green snakes, which glide about the
kraals. to kill these snakes is sacrilege.
"it is well, my brother," said the chief. "rest softly," and having
shaken hands with him, he gave an order to one of the indunas, and
turned away.
then men came, and, supporting the wounded man, led him down to the
banks of the stream. here, at his request, they tied a heavy stone
round his neck, and then threw him into a deep pool. i saw the whole sad
scene, and the victim never even winced. it was impossible not to admire
the extraordinary courage of the man, or to avoid being struck with
the cold-blooded cruelty of his brother the chief. and yet the act was
necessary from his point of view. the man must either die swiftly, or
be left to perish of starvation, for no zulu force will encumber itself
with wounded men. years of merciless warfare had so hardened these
people that they looked on death as nothing, and were, to do them
justice, as willing to meet it themselves as to inflict it on others.
when this very impi had been sent out by the zulu king dingaan, it
consisted of some nine thousand men. now it numbered less than three;
all the rest were dead. they, too, would probably soon be dead. what did
it matter? they lived by war to die in blood. it was their natural end.
"kill till you are killed." that is the motto of the zulu soldier. it
has the merit of simplicity.
meanwhile the warriors were looting the waggons, including my own,
having first thrown all the dead boers into a heap. i looked at the
heap; all of them were there, including the two stout fraus, poor
things. but i missed one body, that of hans botha's daughter, little
tota. a wild hope came into my heart that she might have escaped; but
no, it was not possible. i could only pray that she was already at rest.
just then the great zulu, bombyane, who had left my side to indulge in
the congenial occupation of looting, came out of a waggon crying that
he had got the "little white one." i looked; he was carrying the child
tota, gripping her frock in one of his huge black hands. he stalked
up to where we were, and held the child before the chief. "is it dead,
father?" he said, with a laugh.
now, as i could well see, the child was not dead, but had been hidden
away, and fainted with fear.
the chief glanced at it carelessly, and said--
"find out with your kerrie."
acting on this hint the black devil held up the child, and was about to
kill it with his knobstick. this was more than i could bear. i sprang at
him and struck him with all my force in the face, little caring if i was
speared or not. he dropped tota on the ground.
"ou!" he said, putting his hand to his nose, "the white spirit has a
hard fist. come, spirit, i will fight you for the child."
the soldiers cheered and laughed. "yes! yes!" they said, "let bombyane
fight the white spirit for the child. let them fight with assegais."
for a moment i hesitated. what chance had i against this black giant?
but i had promised poor hans to save the child if i could, and what did
it matter? as well die now as later. however, i had wit enough left to
make a favour of it, and intimated to the chief through indaba-zimbi
that i was quite willing to condescend to kill bombyane, on condition
that if i did so the child's life should be given to me. indaba-zimbi
interpreted my words, but i noticed that he would not look on me as
he spoke, but covered his face with his hands and spoke of me as "the
ghost" or the "son of the spirit." for some reason that i have never
quite understood, the chief consented to the duel. i fancy it was
because he believed me to be more than mortal, and was anxious to see
the last of bombyane.
"let them fight," he said. "give them assegais and no shields; the child
shall be to him who conquers."
"yes! yes!" cried the soldiers. "let them fight. don't be afraid,
bombyane; if he is a spirit, he's a very small one."
"i never was frightened of man or beast, and i am not going to run away
from a white ghost," answered the redoubtable bombyane, as he examined
the blade of his great bangwan or stabbing assegai.
then they made a ring round us, gave me a similar assegai, and set us
some ten paces apart. i kept my face as calm as i could, and tried to
show no signs of fear, though in my heart i was terribly afraid. humanly
speaking, my doom was on me. the giant warrior before me had used the
assegai from a child--i had no experience of the weapon. moreover,
though i was quick and active, he must have been at least twice as
strong as i am. however, there was no help for it, so, setting my teeth,
i grasped the great spear, breathed a prayer, and waited.
the giant stood awhile looking at me, and, as he stood, indaba-zimbi
walked across the ring behind me, muttering as he passed, "keep cool,
macumazahn, and wait for him. i will make it all right."
as i had not the slightest intention of commencing the fray, i thought
this good advice, though how indaba-zimbi could "make it all right" i
failed to see.
heavens! how long that half-minute seemed! it happened many years ago,
but the whole scene rises up before my eyes as i write. there behind us
was the blood-stained laager, and near it lay the piles of dead; round
us was rank upon rank of plumed savages, standing in silence to wait
the issue of the duel, and in the centre stood the grey-haired chief and
general, sususa, in all his war finery, a cloak of leopard skin upon his
shoulders. at his feet lay the senseless form of little tota, to my
left squatted indaba-zimbi, nodding his white lock and muttering
something--probably spells; while in front was my giant antagonist, his
spear aloft and his plumes wavering in the gentle wind. then over all,
over grassy slope, river, and koppie, over the waggons of the laager,
the piles of dead, the dense masses of the living, the swooning
child, over all shone the bright impartial sun, looking down like the
indifferent eye of heaven upon the loveliness of nature and the cruelty
of man. down by the river grew thorn-trees, and from them floated
the sweet scent of the mimosa flower, and came the sound of cooing
turtle-doves. i never smell the one or hear the other without the scene
flashing into my mind again, complete in its every detail.
suddenly, without a sound, bombyane shook his assegai and rushed
straight at me. i saw his huge form come; like a man in a dream, i saw
the broad spear flash on high; now he was on me! then, prompted to it by
some providential impulse--or had the spells of indaba-zimbi anything to
do with the matter?--i dropped to my knee, and quick as light stretched
out my spear. he drove at me: the blade passed over my head. i felt
a weight on my assegai; it was wrenched from my hand; his great limbs
knocked against me. i glanced round. bombyane was staggering along with
head thrown back and outstretched arms from which his spear had fallen.
his spear had fallen, but the blade of mine stood out between his
shoulders--i had transfixed him. he stopped, swung slowly round as
though to look at me: then with a sigh the giant sank down--_dead_.
for a moment there was silence; then a great cry rose--a cry of
"bombyane is dead. the white spirit has slain bombyane. kill the wizard,
kill the ghost who has slain bombyane by witchcraft."
instantly i was surrounded by fierce faces, and spears flashed before my
eyes. i folded my arms and stood calmly waiting the end. in a moment
it would have come, for the warriors were mad at seeing their champion
overthrown thus easily. but presently through the tumult i heard the
high, cracked voice of indaba-zimbi.
"stand back, you fools!" it cried; "can a spirit then be killed?"
"spear him! spear him!" they roared in fury. "let us see if he is a
spirit. how did a spirit slay bombyane with an assegai? spear him,
rain-maker, and we shall see."
"stand back," cried indaba-zimbi again, "and i will show you if he
can be killed. i will kill him myself, and call him back to life again
before your eyes."
"macumazahn, trust me," he whispered in my ear in the sisutu tongue,
which the zulus did not understand. "trust me; kneel on the grass before
me, and when i strike at you with the spear, roll over like one dead;
then, when you hear my voice again, get up. trust me--it is your only
hope."
having no choice i nodded my head in assent, though i had not the
faintest idea of what he was about to do. the tumult lessened somewhat,
and once more the warriors drew back.
"great white spirit--spirit of victory," said indaba-zimbi, addressing
me aloud, and covering his eyes with his hand, "hear me and forgive me.
these children are blind with folly, and think thee mortal because thou
hast dealt death upon a mortal who dared to stand against thee. deign to
kneel down before me and let me pierce thy heart with this spear, then
when i call upon thee, arise unhurt."
i knelt down, not because i wished to, but because i must. i had not
overmuch faith in indaba-zimbi, and thought it probable that he was
in truth about to make an end of me. but really i was so worn out with
fears, and the horrors of the night and day had so shaken my nerves,
that i did not greatly care what befell me. when i had been kneeling
thus for about half a minute indaba-zimbi spoke.
"people of the umtetwa, children of t'chaka," he said, "draw back a
little way, lest an evil fall on you, for now the air is thick with
ghosts."
they drew back a space, leaving us in a circle about twelve yards in
diameter.
"look on him who kneels before you," went on indaba-zimbi, "and
listen to my words, to the words of the witch-finder, the words of the
rain-maker, indaba-zimbi, whose fame is known to you. he seems to be a
young man, does he not? i tell you, children of the umtetwa, he is no
man. he is the spirit who gives victory to the white men, he it is who
gave them assegais that thunder and taught them how to slay. why were
the impis of dingaan rolled back at the blood river? because _he_
was there. why did the amaboona slay the people of mosilikatze by the
thousand? because _he_ was there. and so i say to you that, had i not
drawn him from the laager by my magic but three hours ago, you would
have been conquered--yes, you would have been blown away like the dust
before the wind; you would have been burnt up like the dry grass in
the winter when the fire is awake among it. ay, because he had but been
there many of your bravest were slain in overcoming a few--a pinch
of men who could be counted on the fingers. but because i loved you,
because your chief sususa is my half-brother--for had we not one
father?--i came to you, i warned you. then you prayed me and i drew the
spirit forth. but you were not satisfied when the victory was yours,
when the spirit, of all you had taken asked but one little thing--a
white child to take away and sacrifice to himself, to make the medicine
of his magic of----"
here i could hardly restrain myself from interrupting, but thought
better of it.
"you said him nay; you said, 'let him fight with our bravest man, let
him fight with bombyane the giant for the child.' and he deigned to slay
bombyane as you have seen, and now you say, 'slay him; he is no spirit.'
now i will show you if he is a spirit, for i will slay him before
your eyes, and call him to life again. but you have brought this upon
yourselves. had you believed, had you offered no insult to the spirit,
he would have stayed with you, and you should have become unconquerable.
now he will arise and leave you, and woe be on you if you try to stay
him.
"now all men," he went on, "look for a space upon this assegai that i
hold up," and he lifted the bangwan of the deceased bombyane high above
his head so that all the multitude could see it. every eye was fixed
upon the broad bright spear. for a while he held it still, then he moved
it round and round in a circle, muttering as he did so, and still their
gaze followed it. for my part, i watched his movements with the greatest
anxiety. that assegai had already been nearer my person than i found at
all pleasant, and i had no desire to make a further acquaintance with
it. nor, indeed, was i sure that indaba-zimbi was not really going to
kill me. i could not understand his proceedings at all, and at the best
i did not relish playing the _corpus vile_ to his magical experiments.
"_look! look! look!_" he screamed.
then suddenly the great spear flashed down towards my breast. i felt
nothing, but, to my sight, it seemed as though it had passed through me.
"see!" roared the zulus. "indaba-zimbi has speared him; the red assegai
stands out behind his back."
"roll over, macumazahn," indaba-zimbi hissed in my ear, "roll over and
pretend to die--quick! quick!"
i lost no time in following these strange instructions, but falling
on to my side, threw my arms wide, kicked my legs about, and died as
artistically as i could. presently i gave a stage shiver and lay still.
"see!" said the zulus, "he is dead, the spirit is dead. look at the
blood upon the assegai!"
"stand back! stand back!" cried indaba-zimbi, "or the ghost will haunt
you. yes, he is dead, and now i will call him back to life again. look!"
and putting down his hand, he plucked the spear from wherever it was
fixed, and held it aloft. "the spear is red, is it not? watch, men,
watch! _it grows white!_"
"yes, it grows white," they said. "ou! it grows white."
"it grows white because the blood returns to whence it came," said
indaba-zimbi. "now, great spirit, hear me. thou art dead, the breath has
gone out of thy mouth. yet hear me and arise. awake, white spirit, awake
and show thy power. awake! arise unhurt!"
i began to respond cheerfully to this imposing invocation.
"not so fast, macumazahn," whispered indaba-zimbi.
i took the hint, and first held up my arm, then lifted my head and let
it fall again.
"he lives! by the head of t'chaka he lives!" roared the soldiers,
stricken with mortal fear.
then slowly and with the greatest dignity i gradually arose, stretched
my arms, yawned like one awaking from heavy sleep, turned and looked
upon them unconcernedly. while i did so, i noticed that old indaba-zimbi
was almost fainting from exhaustion. beads of perspiration stood upon
his brow, his limbs trembled, and his breast heaved.
as for the zulus, they waited for no more. with a howl of terror the
whole regiment turned and fled across the rise, so that presently we
were left alone with the dead, and the swooning child.
"how on earth did you do that, indaba-zimbi?" i asked in amaze.
"do not ask me, macumazahn," he gasped. "you white men are very clever,
but you don't quite know everything. there are men in the world who can
make people believe they see things which they do not see. let us be
going while we may, for when those umtetwas have got over their fright,
they will come back to loot the waggons, and then perhaps _they_ will
begin asking questions that i can't answer."
and here i may as well state that i never got any further information on
this matter from old indaba-zimbi. but i have my theory, and here it is
for whatever it may be worth. i believe that indaba-zimbi _mesmerized_
the whole crowd of onlookers, myself included, making them believe that
they saw the assegai in my heart, and the blood upon the blade. the
reader may smile and say, "impossible;" but i would ask him how
the indian jugglers do their tricks unless it is by mesmerism. the
spectators _seem_ to see the boy go under the basket and there pierced
with daggers, they _seem_ to see women in a trance supported in mid-air
upon the point of a single sword. in themselves these things are not
possible, they violate the laws of nature, as those laws are known to
us, and therefore must surely be illusion. and so through the glamour
thrown upon them by indaba-zimbi's will, that zulu impi seemed to see me
transfixed with an assegai which never touched me. at least, that is my
theory; if any one has a better, let him adopt it. the explanation lies
between illusion and magic of a most imposing character, and i prefer to
accept the first alternative.
chapter vi
stella
i was not slow to take indaba-zimbi's hint. about a hundred and fifty
yards to the left of the laager was a little dell where i had hidden
my horse, together with one belonging to the boers, and my saddle and
bridle. thither we went, i carrying the swooning tota in my arms. to our
joy we found the horses safe, for the zulus had not seen them. now, of
course, they were our only means of locomotion, for the oxen had been
sent away, and even had they been there we could not have found time to
inspan them. i laid tota down, caught my horse, undid his knee halter,
and saddled up. as i was doing so a thought struck me, and i told
indaba-zimbi to run to the laager and see if he could find my
double-barrelled gun and some powder and shot, for i had only my
elephant "roer" and a few charges of powder and ball with me.
he went, and while he was away, poor little tota came to herself and
began to cry, till she saw my face.
"ah, i have had such a bad dream," she said, in dutch: "i dreamed that
the black kaffirs were going to kill me. where is my papa?"
i winced at the question. "your papa has gone on a journey, dear," i
said, "and left me to look after you. we shall find him one day. you
don't mind going with heer allan, do you?"
"no," she said, a little doubtfully, and began to cry again. presently
she remembered that she was thirsty, and asked for water. i led her to
the river and she drank. "why is my hand red, heer allan?" she asked,
pointing to the smear of bombyane's blood-stained fingers.
at this moment i felt very glad that i had killed bombyane.
"it is only paint, dear," i said; "see, we will wash it and your face."
as i was doing this, indaba-zimbi returned. the guns were all gone;
he said the zulus had taken them and the powder. but he had found some
things and brought them in a sack. there was a thick blanket, about
twenty pounds weight of biltong or sun-dried meat, a few double-handfuls
of biscuits, two water-bottles, a tin pannikin, some matches and
sundries.
"and now, macumazahn," he said, "we had best be going, for those
umtetwas are coming back. i saw one of them on the brow of the rise."
that was enough for me. i lifted little tota on to the bow of my saddle,
climbed into it, and rode off, holding her in front of me. indaba-zimbi
slipped a reim into the mouth of the best of the boer horses, threw
of the sack of sundries on to its back and mounted also, holding the
elephant gun in his hand. we went eight or nine hundred yards in silence
till we were quite out of range of sight from the waggons, which were
in a hollow. then i pulled up, with such a feeling of thankfulness in
my heart as cannot be told in words; for now i knew that, mounted as
we were, those black demons could never catch us. but where were we to
steer for? i put the question to indaba-zimbi, asking him if he thought
that we had better try and follow the oxen which we had sent away with
the kaffirs and women on the preceding night. he shook his head.
"the umtetwas will go after the oxen presently," he answered, "and we
have seen enough of them."
"quite enough," i answered, with enthusiasm; "i never want to see
another; but where are we to go? here we are alone with one gun and a
little girl in the vast and lonely veldt. which way shall we turn?"
"our faces were towards the north before we met the zulus," answered
indaba-zimbi; "let us still keep them to the north. ride on, macumazahn;
to-night when we off-saddle i will look into the matter."
so all that long afternoon we rode on, following the course of the
river. from the nature of the ground we could only go slowly, but before
sunset i had the satisfaction of knowing that there must be at least
twenty-five miles between us and those accursed zulus. little tota slept
most of the way, the motion of the horse was easy, and she was worn out.
at last the sunset came, and we off-saddled in a dell by the river.
there was not much to eat, but i soaked some biscuit in water for tota,
and indaba-zimbi and i made a scanty meal of biltong. when we had done i
took off tota's frock, wrapped her up in a blanket near the fire we had
made, and lit a pipe. i sat there by the side of the sleeping orphaned
child, and from my heart thanked providence for saving her life and mine
from the slaughter of that day. what a horrible experience it had been!
it seemed like a nightmare to look back upon. and yet it was sober fact,
one among those many tragedies which dotted the paths of the emigrant
boers with the bones of men, women, and children. these horrors are
almost forgotten now; people living in natal now, for instance, can
scarcely realize that some forty years ago six hundred white people,
many of them women and children, were thus massacred by the impis of
dingaan. but it was so, and the name of the district, _weenen_, or the
place of weeping, will commemorate them for ever.
then i fell to reflecting on the extraordinary adroitness old
indaba-zimbi had shown in saving my life. it appeared that he himself
had lived among the umtetwa zulus in his earlier manhood, and was a
noted rain-doctor and witch-finder. but when t'chaka, dingaan's brother,
ordered a general massacre of the witch-finders, he alone had saved his
life by his skill in magic, and ultimately fled south for reasons too
long to set out here. when he heard, therefore, that the regiment was
an umtetwa regiment, which, leaving their wives and children, had broken
away from zululand to escape the cruelties of dingaan; under pretence
of spying on them, he took the bold course of going straight up to the
chief, sususa, and addressing him as his brother, which he was. the
chief knew him at once, and so did the soldiers, for his fame was still
great among them. then he told them his cock and bull story about my
being a white spirit, whose presence in the laager would render it
invincible, and with the object of saving my life in the slaughter which
he knew must ensue, agreed to charm me out of the laager and deliver me
into their keeping. how the plan worked has already been told; it was a
risky one; still, but for it my troubles would have been done with these
many days.
so i lay and thought with a heart full of gratitude, and as i did so saw
old indaba-zimbi sitting by the fire and going through some mysterious
performances with bones which he produced from his bag, and ashes mixed
with water. i spoke to him and asked what he was about. he replied that
he was tracing out the route that we should follow. i felt inclined to
answer "bosh!" but remembering the very remarkable instances which he
had given of his prowess in occult matters i held my tongue, and taking
little tota into my arms, worn out with toil and danger and emotion, i
went to sleep.
i awoke just as the dawn was beginning to flame across the sky in sheets
of primrose and of gold, or rather it was little tota who woke me by
kissing me as she lay between sleep and waking, and calling me "papa."
it wrung my heart to hear her, poor orphaned child. i got up, washed
and dressed her as best i could, and we breakfasted as we had supped,
on biltong and biscuit. tota asked for milk, but i had none to give her.
then we caught the horses, and i saddled mine.
"well, indaba-zimbi," i said, "now what path do your bones point to?"
"straight north," he said. "the journey will be hard, but in about four
days we shall come to the kraal of a white man, an englishman, not
a boer. his kraal is in a beautiful place, and there is a great peak
behind it where there are many baboons."
i looked at him. "this is all nonsense, indaba-zimbi," i said. "whoever
heard of an englishman building a house in these wilds, and how do you
know anything about it? i think that we had better strike east towards
port natal."
"as you like, macumazahn," he answered, "but it will take us three
months' journey to get to port natal, if we ever get there, and the
child will die on the road. say, macumazahn, have my words come true
heretofore, or have they not? did i not tell you not to hunt the
elephants on horseback? did i not tell you to take one waggon with you
instead of two, as it is better to lose one than two?"
"you told me all these things," i answered.
"and so i tell you now to ride north, macumazahn, for there you will
find great happiness--yes, and great sorrow. but no man should run away
from happiness because of the sorrow. as you will, as you will!"
again i looked at him. in his divinations i did not believe, yet i came
to the conclusion that he was speaking what he knew to be the truth. it
struck me as possible that he might have heard of some white man living
like a hermit in the wilds, but preferring to keep up his prophetic
character would not say so.
"very well, indaba-zimbi," i said, "let us ride north."
shortly after we started, the river we had followed hitherto turned
off in a westerly direction, so we left it. all that day we rode across
rolling uplands, and about an hour before sunset halted at a little
stream which ran down from a range of hills in front of us. by this time
i was heartily tired of the biltong, so taking my elephant rifle--for i
had nothing else--i left tota with indaba-zimbi, and started to try if i
could shoot something. oddly enough we had seen no game all the day, nor
did we see any on the subsequent days. for some mysterious reason they
had temporarily left the district. i crossed the little streamlet in
order to enter the belt of thorns which grew upon the hill-side beyond,
for there i hoped to find buck. as i did so i was rather disturbed to
see the spoor of two lions in the soft sandy edge of a pool. breathing
a hope that they might not still be in the neighbourhood, i went on into
the belt of scattered thorns. for a long while i hunted about without
seeing anything, except one duiker buck, which bounded off with a crash
from the other side of a stone without giving me a chance. at length,
just as it grew dusk, i spied a petie buck, a graceful little creature,
scarcely bigger than a large hare, standing on a stone, about forty
yards from me. under ordinary circumstances i should never have dreamed
of firing at such a thing, especially with an elephant gun, but we were
hungry. so i sat down with my back against a rock, and aimed steadily at
its head. i did this because if i struck it in the body the three-ounce
ball would have knocked it to bits. at last i pulled the trigger,
the gun went off with the report of a small cannon, and the buck
disappeared. i ran to the spot with more anxiety than i should have felt
in an ordinary way over a koodoo or an eland. to my delight there the
little creature lay--the huge bullet had decapitated it. considering all
the circumstances i do not think i have often made a better shot than
this, but if any one doubts, let him try his hand at a rabbit's head
fifty yards away with an elephant gun and a three-ounce ball.
i picked up the petie in triumph, and returned to the camp. there we
skinned him and toasted his flesh over the fire. he just made a good
meal for us, though we kept the hind legs for breakfast.
there was no moon this night, and so it chanced that when i suddenly
remembered about the lion spoor, and suggested that we had better tie
up the horses quite close to us, we could not find them, though we knew
they were grazing within fifty yards. this being so we could only make
up the fire and take our chance. shortly afterwards i went to sleep
with little tota in my arms. suddenly i was awakened by hearing that
peculiarly painful sound, the scream of a horse, quite close to the
fire, which was still burning brightly. next second there came a noise
of galloping hoofs, and before i could even rise my poor horse appeared
in the ring of firelight. as in a flash of lightning i saw his staring
eyes and wide-stretched nostrils, and the broken reim with which he had
been knee-haltered, flying in the air. also i saw something else, for on
his back was a great dark form with glowing eyes, and from the form came
a growling sound. it was a lion.
the horse dashed on. he galloped right through the fire, for which he
had run in his terror, fortunately, however, without treading on us, and
vanished into the night. we heard his hoofs for a hundred yards or more,
then there was silence, broken now and again by distant growls. as may
be imagined, we did not sleep any more that night, but waited anxiously
till the dawn broke, two hours later.
as soon as there was sufficient light we rose, and, leaving tota
still asleep, crept cautiously in the direction in which the horse had
vanished. when we had gone fifty yards or so, we made out its remains
lying on the veldt, and caught sight of two great cat-like forms
slinking away in the grey light.
to go any further was useless; we knew all about it now, so we turned
to look for the other horse. but our cup of misfortune was not yet full;
the horse was nowhere to be found. terrified by the sight and smell of
the lions, it had with a desperate effort also burst the reim with which
it had been knee-haltered, and galloped far away. i sat down, feeling
as though i could cry like a woman. for now we were left alone in these
vast solitudes without a horse to carry us, and with a child who was not
old enough to walk for more than a little way at a time.
well, it was no use giving in, so with a few words we went back to our
camp, where i found tota crying because she had woke to find herself
alone. then we ate a little food and prepared to start. first we divided
such articles as we must take with us into two equal parts, rejecting
everything that we could possibly do without. then, by an afterthought,
we filled our water-bottles, though at the time i was rather against
doing so, because of the extra weight. but indaba-zimbi overruled me
in the matter, fortunately for all three of us. i settled to look after
tota for the first march, and to give the elephant gun to indaba-zimbi.
at length all was ready, and we set out on foot. by the help of
occasional lifts over rough places, tota managed to walk up the slope of
the hill-side where i had shot the petie buck. at length we reached it,
and, looking at the country beyond, i gave an exclamation of dismay. to
say that it was desert would be saying too much; it was more like the
karroo in the cape--a vast sandy waste, studded here and there with low
shrubs and scattered rocks. but it was a great expanse of desolate land,
stretching further than the eye could reach, and bordered far away by
a line of purple hills, in the centre of which a great solitary peak
soared high into the air.
"indaba-zimbi," i said, "we can never cross this if we take six days."
"as you will, macumazahn," he answered; "but i tell you that there"--and
he pointed to the peak--"there the white man lives. turn which way you
like, but if you turn you will perish."
i reflected for a moment, our case was, humanly speaking, almost
hopeless. it mattered little which way we went. we were alone, almost
without food, with no means of transport, and a child to carry. as well
perish in the sandy waste as on the rolling veldt or among the trees
of the hill-side. providence alone could save us, and we must trust to
providence.
"come on," i said, lifting tota on to my back, for she was already
tired. "all roads lead to rest."
how am i to describe the misery of the next four days? how am i to tell
how we stumbled on through that awful desert, almost without food, and
quite without water, for there were no streams, and we saw no springs?
we soon found how the case was, and saved almost all the water in our
bottles for the child. to look back on it is like a nightmare. i can
scarcely bear to dwell on it. day after day, by turns carrying the
child through the heavy sand; night after night lying down in the scrub,
chewing the leaves, and licking such dew as there was from the scanty
grass! not a spring, not a pool, not a head of game! it was the third
night; we were nearly mad with thirst. tota was in a comatose condition.
indaba-zimbi still had a little water in his bottle--perhaps a
wine-glassful. with it we moistened our lips and blackened tongues. then
we gave the rest to the child. it revived her. she awoke from her swoon
to sink into sleep.
see, the dawn was breaking. the hills were not more than eight miles or
so away now, and they were green. there must be water there.
"come," i said.
indaba-zimbi lifted tota into the kind of sling that we had made out of
the blanket in which to carry her on our backs, and we staggered on for
an hour through the sand. she awoke crying for water, and alas! we
had none to give her; our tongues were hanging from our lips, we could
scarcely speak.
we rested awhile, and tota mercifully swooned away again. then
indaba-zimbi took her. though he was so thin the old man's strength was
wonderful.
another hour; the slope of the great peak could not be more than two
miles away now. a couple of hundred yards off grew a large baobab
tree. could we reach its shade? we had done half the distance when
indaba-zimbi fell from exhaustion. we were now so weak that neither of
us could lift the child on to our backs. he rose again, and we each
took one of her hands and dragged her along the road. fifty yards--they
seemed to be fifty miles. ah, the tree was reached at last; compared
with the heat outside, the shade of its dense foliage seemed like the
dusk and cool of a vault. i remember thinking that it was a good place
to die in. then i remember no more.
i woke with a feeling as though the blessed rain were falling on my face
and head. slowly, and with great difficulty, i opened my eyes, then shut
them again, having seen a vision. for a space i lay thus, while the rain
continued to fall; i saw now that i must be asleep, or off my head with
thirst and fever. if i were not off my head how came i to imagine that a
lovely dark-eyed girl was bending over me sprinkling water on my face? a
white girl, too, not a kaffir woman. however, the dream went on.
"hendrika," said a voice in english, the sweetest voice that i had ever
heard; somehow it reminded me of wind whispering in the trees at night.
"hendrika, i fear he dies; there is a flask of brandy in my saddle-bag;
get it."
"ah! ah!" grunted a harsh voice in answer; "let him die, miss stella. he
will bring you bad luck--let him die, i say." i felt a movement of air
above me as though the woman of my vision turned swiftly, and once again
i opened my eyes. she had risen, this dream woman. now i saw that she
was tall and graceful as a reed. she was angry, too; her dark eyes
flashed, and she pointed with her hand at a female who stood before her,
dressed in nondescript kind of clothes such as might be worn by either
a man or a woman. the woman was young, of white blood, very short, with
bowed legs and enormous shoulders. in face she was not bad-looking,
but the brow receded, the chin and ears were prominent--in short, she
reminded me of nothing so much as a very handsome monkey. she might have
been the missing link.
the lady was pointing at her with her hand. "how dare you?" she said.
"are you going to disobey me again? have you forgotten what i told you,
babyan?"[*]
[*] baboon.
"ah! ah!" grunted the woman, who seemed literally to curl and shrivel up
beneath her anger. "don't be angry with me, miss stella, because i can't
bear it. i only said it because it was true. i will fetch the brandy."
then, dream or no dream, i determined to speak.
"not brandy," i gasped in english as well as my swollen tongue would
allow; "give me water."
"ah, he lives!" cried the beautiful girl, "and he talks english. see,
sir, here is water in your own bottle; you were quite close to a spring,
it is on the other side of the tree."
i struggled to a sitting position, lifted the bottle to my lips, and
drank from it. oh! that drink of cool, pure water! never had i tasted
anything so delicious. with the first gulp i felt life flow back into
me. but wisely enough she would not let me have much. "no more! no
more!" she said, and dragged the bottle from me almost by force.
"the child," i said--"is the child dead?"
"i do not know yet," she answered. "we have only just found you, and i
tried to revive you first."
i turned and crept to where tota lay by the side of indaba-zimbi. it
was impossible to say if they were dead or swooning. the lady sprinkled
tota's face with the water, which i watched greedily, for my thirst
was still awful, while the woman hendrika did the same office for
indaba-zimbi. presently, to my vast delight, tota opened her eyes and
tried to cry, but could not, poor little thing, because her tongue and
lips were so swollen. but the lady got some water into her mouth, and,
as in my case, the effect was magical. we allowed her to drink about a
quarter of a pint, and no more, though she cried bitterly for it. just
then old indaba-zimbi came to with a groan. he opened his eyes, glanced
round, and took in the situation.
"what did i tell you, macumazahn?" he gasped, and seizing the bottle, he
took a long pull at it.
meanwhile i sat with my back against the trunk of the great tree and
tried to realize the situation. looking to my left i saw too good
horses--one bare-backed, and one with a rudely made lady's saddle on
it. by the side of the horses were two dogs, of a stout greyhound breed,
that sat watching us, and near the dogs lay a dead oribe buck, which
they had evidently been coursing.
"hendrika," said the lady presently, "they must not eat meat just yet.
go look up the tree and see if there is any ripe fruit on it."
the woman ran swiftly into the plain and obeyed. presently she returned.
"i see some ripe fruit," she said, "but it is high, quite at the top."
"fetch it," said the lady.
"easier said than done," i thought to myself; but i was much mistaken.
suddenly the woman bounded at least three feet into the air and caught
one of the spreading boughs in her large flat hands; then came a swing
that would have filled an acrobat with envy--and she was on it.
"now there is an end," i thought again, for the next bough was beyond
her reach. but again i was mistaken. she stood up on the bough, gripping
it with her bare feet, and once more sprang at the one above, caught it
and swung herself into it.
i suppose that the lady saw my expression of astonishment. "do not
wonder, sir," she said, "hendrika is not like other people. she will not
fall."
i made no answer, but watched the progress of this extraordinary person
with the most breathless interest. on she went, swinging herself from
bough to bough, and running along them like a monkey. at last she
reached the top, and began to swarm up a thin branch towards the ripe
fruit. when she was near enough she shook the branch violently. there
was a crack--a crash--it broke. i shut my eyes, expecting to see her
crushed on the ground before me.
"don't be afraid," said the lady again, laughing gently. "look, she is
quite safe."
i looked, and so she was. she had caught a bough as she fell, clung to
it, and was now calmly dropping to another. old indaba-zimbi had also
watched this performance with interest, but it did not seem to astonish
him over-much. "baboon-woman?" he said, as though such people were
common, and then turned his attention to soothing tota, who was moaning
for more water. meanwhile hendrika came down the tree with extraordinary
rapidity, and swinging by one hand from a bough, dropped about eight
feet to the ground.
in another two minutes we were all three sucking the pulpy fruit. in
an ordinary way we should have found it tasteless enough: as it was i
thought it the most delicious thing i had ever tasted. after three days
spent without food or water, in the desert, one is not particular. while
we were still eating the fruit, the lady of my vision set her companion
to work to partially flay the oribe which her dogs had killed, and
busied herself in making a fire of fallen boughs. as soon as it burned
brightly she took strips of the oribe flesh, toasted them, and gave them
to us on leaves. we ate, and now were allowed a little more water. after
that she took tota to the spring and washed her, which she sadly needed,
poor child! next came our turn to wash, and oh, the joy of it!
i came back to the tree, walking painfully, indeed, but a changed man.
there sat the beautiful girl with tota on her knees. she was lulling her
to sleep, and held up her finger to me enjoining silence. at last the
child went off into a sound natural slumber--an example that i should
have been glad to follow had it not been for my burning curiosity. then
i spoke.
"may i ask what your name is?" i said.
"stella," she answered.
"stella what?" i said.
"stella nothing," she answered, in some pique; "stella is my name; it is
short and easy to remember at any rate. my father's name is thomas, and
we live up there," and she pointed round the base of the great peak. i
looked at her astonished. "have you lived there long?" i asked.
"ever since i was seven years old. we came there in a waggon. before
that we came from england--from oxfordshire; i can show you the place on
a big map. it is called garsingham."
again i thought i must be dreaming. "do you know, miss stella," i said,
"it is very strange--so strange that it almost seems as though it could
not be true--but i also came from garsingham in oxfordshire many years
ago."
she started up. "are you an english gentleman?" she said. "ah, i have
always longed to see an english gentleman. i have never seen but one
englishman since we lived here, and he certainly was not a gentleman--no
white people at all, indeed, except a few wandering boers. we live among
black people and baboons--only i have read about english people--lots of
books--poetry and novels. but tell me what is your name? macumazahn the
black man called you, but you must have a white name, too."
"my name is allan quatermain," i said.
her face turned quite white, her rosy lips parted, and she looked at me
wildly with her beautiful dark eyes.
"it is wonderful," she said, "but i have often heard that name. my
father has told me how a little boy called allan quatermain once saved
my life by putting out my dress when it was on fire--see!"--and she
pointed to a faint red mark upon her neck--"here is the scar of the
burn."
"i remember it," i said. "you were dressed up as father christmas. it
was i who put out the fire; my wrists were burnt in doing so."
then for a space we sat silent, looking at each other, while stella
slowly fanned herself with her wide felt hat, in which some white
ostrich plumes were fixed.
"this is god's doing," she said at last. "you saved my life when i was
a child; now i have saved yours and the little girl's. is she your own
daughter?" she added, quickly.
"no," i answered; "i will tell you the tale presently."
"yes," she said, "you shall tell me as we go home. it is time to be
starting home, it will take us three hours to get there. hendrika,
hendrika, bring the horses here!"
chapter vii
the baboon-woman
hendrika obeyed, leading the horses to the side of the tree.
"now, mr. allan," said stella, "you must ride on my horse, and the old
black man must ride on the other. i will walk, and hendrika will carry
the child. oh, do not be afraid, she is very strong, she could carry you
or me."
hendrika grunted assent. i am sorry that i cannot express her method
of speech by any more polite term. sometimes she grunted like a monkey,
sometimes she clicked like a bushman, and sometimes she did both
together, when she became quite unintelligible.
i expostulated against this proposed arrangement, saying that we could
walk, which was a fib, for i do not think that i could have done a mile;
but stella would not listen, she would not even let me carry my elephant
gun, but took it herself. so we mounted with some difficulty, and
hendrika took up the sleeping tota in her long, sinewy arms.
"see that the 'baboon-woman' does not run away into the mountains with
the little white one," said indaba-zimbi to me in kaffir, as he climbed
slowly on to the horse.
unfortunately hendrika understood his speech. her face twisted and grew
livid with fury. she put down tota and literally sprang at indaba-zimbi
as a monkey springs. but weary and worn as he was, the old gentleman
was too quick for her. with an exclamation of genuine fright he threw
himself from the horse on the further side, with the somewhat ludicrous
result that all in a moment hendrika was occupying the seat which he had
vacated. just then stella realized the position.
"come down, you savage, come down!" she said, stamping her foot.
the extraordinary creature flung herself from the horse and literally
grovelled on the ground before her mistress and burst into tears.
"pardon, miss stella," she clicked and grunted in villainous english,
"but he called me 'babyan-frau' (baboon-woman)."
"tell your servant that he must not use such words to hendrika, mr.
allan," stella said to me. "if he does," she added, in a whisper,
"hendrika will certainly kill him."
i explained this to indaba-zimbi, who, being considerably frightened,
deigned to apologize. but from that hour there was hate and war between
these two.
harmony having been thus restored, we started, the dogs following us.
a small strip of desert intervened between us and the slope of the
peak--perhaps it was two miles wide. we crossed it and reached rich
grass lands, for here a considerable stream gathered from the hills; but
it did not flow across the barren lands, it passed to the east along
the foot of the hills. this stream we had to cross by a ford. hendrika
walked boldly through it, holding tota in her arms. stella leapt across
from stone to stone like a roebuck; i thought to myself that she was the
most graceful creature that i had ever seen. after this the track passed
around a pleasantly-wooded shoulder of the peak, which was, i found,
known as babyan kap, or baboon head. of course we could only go at
a foot pace, so our progress was slow. stella walked for some way in
silence, then she spoke.
"tell me, mr. allan," she said, "how it was that i came to find you
dying in the desert?"
so i began and told her all. it took an hour or more to do so, and she
listened intently, now and again asking a question.
"it is all very wonderful," she said when i had done, "very wonderful
indeed. do you know i went out this morning with hendrika and the dogs
for a ride, meaning to get back home by mid-day, for my father is ill,
and i do not like to leave him for long. but just as i was going to
turn, when we were about where we are now--yes, that was the very
bush--an oribe got up, and the dogs chased it. i followed them for the
gallop, and when we came to the river, instead of turning to the left as
bucks generally do, the oribe swam the stream and took to the bad lands
beyond. i followed it, and within a hundred yards of the big tree the
dogs killed it. hendrika wanted to turn back at once, but i said that
we would rest under the shade of the tree, for i knew that there was a
spring of water near. well, we went; and there i saw you all lying like
dead; but hendrika, who is very clever in some ways, said no--and you
know the rest. yes, it is very wonderful."
"it is indeed," i said. "now tell me, miss stella, who is hendrika?"
she looked round before answering to see that the woman was not near.
"hers is a strange story, mr. allan. i will tell you. you must know that
all these mountains and the country beyond are full of baboons. when i
was a girl of about ten i used to wander a great deal alone in the hills
and valleys, and watch the baboons as they played among the rocks. there
was one family of baboons that i watched especially--they used to live
in a kloof about a mile from the house. the old man baboon was very
large, and one of the females had a grey face. but the reason why
i watched them so much was because i saw that they had with them a
creature that looked like a girl, for her skin was quite white, and,
what was more, that she was protected from the weather when it happened
to be cold by a fur belt of some sort, which was tied round her throat.
the old baboons seemed to be especially fond of her, and would sit with
their arms round her neck. for nearly a whole summer i watched this
particular white-skinned baboon till at last my curiosity quite
overmastered me. i noticed that, though she climbed about the cliffs
with the other monkeys, at a certain hour a little before sundown they
used to put her with one or two other much smaller ones into a little
cave, while the family went off somewhere to get food, to the mealie
fields, i suppose. then i got an idea that i would catch this white
baboon and bring it home. but of course i could not do this by myself,
so i took a hottentot--a very clever man when he was not drunk--who
lived on the stead, into my confidence. he was called hendrik, and was
very fond of me; but for a long while he would not listen to my plan,
because he said that the babyans would kill us. at last i bribed him
with a knife that had four blades, and one afternoon we started, hendrik
carrying a stout sack made of hide, with a rope running through it so
that the mouth could be drawn tight.
"well, we got to the place, and, hiding ourselves carefully in the trees
at the foot of the kloof, watched the baboons playing about and grunting
to each other, till at length, according to custom, they took the white
one and three other little babies and put them in the cave. then the old
man came out, looked carefully round, called to his family, and went off
with them over the brow of the kloof. now very slowly and cautiously we
crept up over the rocks till we came to the mouth of the cave and looked
in. all the four little baboons were fast asleep, with their backs
towards us, and their arms round each other's necks, the white one being
in the middle. nothing could have been better for our plans. hendrik,
who by this time had quite entered into the spirit of the thing, crept
along the cave like a snake, and suddenly dropped the mouth of the hide
bag over the head of the white baboon. the poor little thing woke up and
gave a violent jump which caused it to vanish right into the bag. then
hendrik pulled the string tight, and together we knotted it so that
it was impossible for our captive to escape. meanwhile the other baby
baboons had rushed from the cave screaming, and when we got outside they
were nowhere to be seen.
"'come on, missie,' said hendrik; 'the babyans will soon be back.' he
had shouldered the sack, inside of which the white baboon was kicking
violently, and screaming like a child. it was dreadful to hear its
shrieks.
"we scrambled down the sides of the kloof and ran for home as fast as
we could manage. when we were near the waterfall, and within about three
hundred yards of the garden wall, we heard a voice behind us, and there,
leaping from rock to rock, and running over the grass, was the whole
family of baboons headed by the old man.
"'run, missie, run!' gasped hendrik, and i did, like the wind, leaving
him far behind. i dashed into the garden, where some kaffirs were
working, crying, 'the babyans! the babyans!' luckily the men had their
sticks and spears by them and ran out just in time to save hendrik, who
was almost overtaken. the baboons made a good fight for it, however,
and it was not till the old man was killed with an assegai that they ran
away.
"well, there is a stone hut in the kraal at the stead where my father
sometimes shuts up natives who have misbehaved. it is very strong, and
has a barred window. to this hut hendrik carried the sack, and, having
untied the mouth, put it down on the floor, and ran from the place,
shutting the door behind him. in another moment the poor little thing
was out and dashing round the stone hut as though it were mad. it sprung
at the bars of the window, clung there, and beat its head against them
till the blood came. then it fell to the floor, and sat upon it crying
like a child, and rocking itself backwards and forwards. it was so sad
to see it that i began to cry too.
"just then my father came in and asked what all the fuss was about. i
told him that we had caught a young white baboon, and he was angry, and
said that it must be let go. but when he looked at it through the bars
of the window he nearly fell down with astonishment.
"'why!' he said, 'this is not a baboon, it is a white child that the
baboons have stolen and brought up!'
"now, mr. allan, whether my father is right or wrong, you can judge for
yourself. you see hendrika--we named her that after hendrik, who caught
her--she is a woman, not a monkey, and yet she has many of the ways
of monkeys, and looks like one too. you saw how she can climb, for
instance, and you hear how she talks. also she is very savage, and when
she is angry or jealous she seems to go mad, though she is as clever as
anybody. i think that she must have been stolen by the baboons when
she was quite tiny and nurtured by them, and that is why she is so like
them.
"but to go on. my father said that it was our duty to keep hendrika
at any cost. the worst of it was, that for three days she would eat
nothing, and i thought that she would die, for all the while she sat
and wailed. on the third day, however, i went to the bars of the window
place, and held out a cup of milk and some fruit to her. she looked at
it for a long while, then crept up moaning, took the milk from my hand,
drank it greedily, and afterwards ate the fruit. from that time forward
she took food readily enough, but only if i would feed her.
"but i must tell you of the dreadful end of hendrik. from the day that
we captured hendrika the whole place began to swarm with baboons which
were evidently employed in watching the kraals. one day hendrik went out
towards the hills alone to gather some medicine. he did not come back
again, so the next day search was made. by a big rock which i can show
you, they found his scattered and broken bones, the fragments of his
assegai, and four dead baboons. they had set upon him and torn him to
pieces.
"my father was very much frightened at this, but still he would not let
hendrika go, because he said that she was human, and that it was our
duty to reclaim her. and so we did--to a certain extent, at least. after
the murder of hendrik, the baboons vanished from the neighbourhood,
and have only returned quite recently, so at length we ventured to let
hendrika out. by this time she had grown very fond of me; still, on the
first opportunity she ran away. but in the evening she returned again.
she had been seeking the baboons, and could not find them. shortly
afterwards she began to speak--i taught her--and from that time she has
loved me so that she will not leave me. i think it would kill her if i
went away from her. she watches me all day, and at night sleeps on the
floor of my hut. once, too, she saved my life when i was swept down the
river in flood; but she is jealous, and hates everybody else. look, how
she is glaring at you now because i am talking to you!"
i looked. hendrika was tramping along with the child in her arms and
staring at me in a most sinister fashion out of the corners of her eyes.
while i was reflecting on the baboon-woman's strange story, and thinking
that she was an exceedingly awkward customer, the path took a sudden
turn.
"look!" said stella, "there is our home. is it not beautiful?"
it was beautiful indeed. here on the western side of the great peak a
bay had been formed in the mountain, which might have measured eight
hundred or a thousand yards across by three-quarters of a mile in depth.
at the back of this indentation the sheer cliff rose to the height of
several hundred feet, and behind it and above it the great babyan peak
towered up towards the heavens. the space of ground, embraced thus in
the arms of the mountain, as it were, was laid out, as though by the
cunning hand of man, in three terraces that rose one above the other. to
the right and left of the topmost terrace were chasms in the cliff, and
down each chasm fell a waterfall, from no great height, indeed, but of
considerable volume. these two streams flowed away on either side of
the enclosed space, one towards the north, and the other, the course
of which we had been following, round the base of the mountain. at each
terrace they made a cascade, so that the traveller approaching had a
view of eight waterfalls at once. along the edge of the stream to our
left were placed kaffir kraals, built in orderly groups with verandahs,
after the basutu fashion, and a very large part of the entire space of
land was under cultivation. all of this i noted at once, as well as the
extraordinary richness and depth of the soil, which for many ages past
had been washed down from the mountain heights. then following the line
of an excellent waggon road, on which we now found ourselves, that wound
up from terrace to terrace, my eye lit upon the crowning wonder of the
scene. for in the centre of the topmost platform or terrace, which may
have enclosed eight or ten acres of ground, and almost surrounded by
groves of orange trees, gleamed buildings of which i had never seen the
like. there were three groups of them, one in the middle, and one on
either side, and a little to the rear, but, as i afterwards discovered,
the plan of all was the same. in the centre was an edifice constructed
like an ordinary zulu hut--that is to say, in the shape of a beehive,
only it was five times the size of any hut i ever saw, and built
of blocks of hewn white marble, fitted together with extraordinary
knowledge of the principles and properties of arch building, and with so
much accuracy and finish that it was often difficult to find the joints
of the massive blocks. from this centre hut ran three covered passages,
leading to other buildings of an exactly similar character, only
smaller, and each whole block was enclosed by a marble wall about four
feet in height.
of course we were as yet too far off to see all these details, but the
general outline i saw at once, and it astonished me considerably. even
old indaba-zimbi, whom the baboon-woman had been unable to move, deigned
to show wonder.
"ou!" he said; "this is a place of marvels. who ever saw kraals built of
white stone?"
stella watched our faces with an expression of intense amusement, but
said nothing.
"did your father build those kraals?" i gasped, at length.
"my father! no, of course not," she answered. "how would it have been
possible for one white man to do so, or to have made this road? he found
them as you see."
"who built them, then?" i said again.
"i do not know. my father thinks that they are very ancient, for the
people who live here now do not know how to lay one stone upon another,
and these huts are so wonderfully constructed that, though they must
have stood for ages, not a stone of them had fallen. but i can show you
the quarry where the marble was cut; it is close by and behind it is the
entrance to an ancient mine, which my father thinks was a silver mine.
perhaps the people who worked the mine built the marble huts. the
world is old, and no doubt plenty of people have lived in it and been
forgotten."[*]
[*] kraals of a somewhat similar nature to those described
by mr. quatermain have been discovered in the marico
district of the transvaal, and an illustration of them is to
be found in mr. anderson's "twenty-five years in a waggon,"
vol. ii. p. 55. mr. anderson says, "in this district are the
ancient stone kraals mentioned in an early chapter; but it
requires a fuller description to show that these extensive
kraals must have been erected by a white race who understood
building in stone and at right angles, with door-posts,
lintels, and sills, and it required more than kaffir skill
to erect the stone huts, with stone circular roofs,
beautifully formed and most substantially erected; strong
enough, if not disturbed, to last a thousand years."
--editor.
then we rode on in silence. i have seen many beautiful sights in africa,
and in such matters, as in others, comparisons are odious and worthless,
but i do not think that i ever saw a lovelier scene. it was no one
thing--it was the combination of the mighty peak looking forth on to the
everlasting plains, the great cliffs, the waterfalls that sparkled
in rainbow hues, the rivers girdling the rich cultivated lands, the
gold-specked green of the orange trees, the flashing domes of the marble
huts, and a thousand other things. then over all brooded the peace of
evening, and the infinite glory of the sunset that filled heaven with
changing hues of splendour, that wrapped the mountain and cliffs in
cloaks of purple and of gold, and lay upon the quiet face of the water
like the smile of a god.
perhaps also the contrast, and the memory of those three awful days
and nights in the hopeless desert, enhanced the charm, and perhaps the
beauty of the girl who walked beside me completed it. for of this i am
sure, that of all sweet and lovely things that i looked on then, she was
the sweetest and the loveliest.
ah, it did not take me long to find my fate. how long will it be before
i find her once again?
chapter viii
the marble kraals
at length the last platform, or terrace, was reached, and we pulled up
outside the wall surrounding the central group of marble huts--for so
i must call them, for want of a better name. our approach had been
observed by a crowd of natives, whose race i have never been able to
determine accurately; they belonged to the basutu and peaceful section
of the bantu peoples rather than to the zulu and warlike. several of
these ran up to take the horses, gazing on us with astonishment, not
unmixed with awe. we dismounted--speaking for myself, not without
difficulty--indeed, had it not been for stella's support i should have
fallen.
"now you must come and see my father," she said. "i wonder what he will
think of it, it is all so strange. hendrika, take the child to my hut
and give her milk, then put her into my bed; i will come presently."
hendrika went off with a somewhat ugly grin to do her mistress's
bidding, and stella led the way through the narrow gateway in the marble
wall, which may have enclosed nearly half an "erf," or three-quarters of
an acre of ground in all. it was beautifully planted as a garden, many
european vegetables and flowers were growing in it, besides others with
which i was not acquainted. presently we came to the centre hut, and
it was then that i noticed the extraordinary beauty and finish of the
marble masonry. in the hut, and facing the gateway, was a modern door,
rather rudely fashioned of buckenhout, a beautiful reddish wood that
has the appearance of having been sedulously pricked with a pin. stella
opened it, and we entered. the interior of the hut was the size of a
large and lofty room, the walls being formed of plain polished marble.
it was lighted somewhat dimly, but quite effectively, by peculiar
openings in the roof, from which the rain was excluded by overhanging
eaves. the marble floor was strewn with native mats and skins of
animals. bookcases filled with books were placed against the walls,
there was a table in the centre, chairs seated with rimpi or strips of
hide stood about, and beyond the table was a couch on which a man was
lying reading.
"is that you, stella?" said a voice, that even after so many years
seemed familiar to me. "where have you been, my dear? i began to think
that you had lost yourself again."
"no, father, dear, i have not lost myself, but i have found somebody
else."
at that moment i stepped forward so that the light fell on me. the old
gentleman on the couch rose with some difficulty and bowed with much
courtesy. he was a fine-looking old man, with deep-set dark eyes, a pale
face that bore many traces of physical and mental suffering, and a long
white beard.
"be welcome, sir," he said. "it is long since we have seen a white
face in these wilds, and yours, if i am not mistaken, is that of an
englishman. there has been but one englishman here for twelve years, and
he, i grieve to say, was an outcast flying from justice," and he bowed
again and stretched out his hand.
i looked at him, and then of a sudden his name flashed back into my
mind. i took his hand.
"how do you do, mr. carson?" i said.
he started as though he had been stung.
"who told you that name?" he cried. "it is a dead name. stella, is it
you? i forbade you to let it pass your lips."
"i did not speak it, father. i have never spoken it," she answered.
"sir," i broke in, "if you will allow me i will show you how i came to
know your name. do you remember many years ago coming into the study of
a clergyman in oxfordshire and telling him that you were going to leave
england for ever?"
he bowed his head.
"and do you remember a little boy who sat upon the hearthrug writing
with a pencil?"
"i do," he said.
"sir, i was that boy, and my name is allan quatermain. those children
who lay sick are all dead, their mother is dead, and my father, your old
friend, is dead also. like you he emigrated, and last year he died in
the cape. but that is not all the story. after many adventures, i, one
kaffir, and a little girl, lay senseless and dying in the bad lands,
where we had wandered for days without water, and there we should have
perished, but your daughter, miss----"
"call her stella," he broke in, hastily. "i cannot bear to hear that
name. i have forsworn it."
"miss stella found us by chance and saved our lives."
"by chance, did you say, allan quatermain?" he answered. "there is
little chance in all this; such chances spring from another will than
ours. welcome, allan, son of my old friend. here we live as it were in a
hermitage, with nature as our only friend, but such as we have is yours,
and for as long as you will take it. but you must be starving; talk no
more now. stella, it is time to eat. to-morrow we will talk."
to tell the truth i can recall very little of the events of that
evening. a kind of dizzy weariness overmastered me. i remember sitting
at a table next to stella, and eating heartily, and then i remember
nothing more.
i awoke to find myself lying on a comfortable bed in a hut built and
fashioned on the same model as the centre one. while i was wondering
what time it was, a native came bringing some clean clothes on his arm,
and, luxury of luxuries, produced a bath hollowed from wood. i rose,
feeling a very different man, my strength had come back again to me; i
dressed, and following a covered passage found myself in the centre hut.
here the table was set for breakfast with all manner of good things,
such as i had not seen for many a month, which i contemplated with
healthy satisfaction. presently i looked up, and there before me was a
more delightful sight, for standing in one of the doorways which led to
the sleeping huts was stella, leading little tota by the hand.
she was very simply dressed in a loose blue gown, with a wide collar,
and girdled in at the waist by a little leather belt. in the bosom of
her robe was a bunch of orange blooms, and her rippling hair was tied
in a single knot behind her shapely head. she greeted me with a smile,
asking how i had slept, and then held tota up for me to kiss. under her
loving care the child had been quite transformed. she was neatly dressed
in a garment of the same blue stuff that stella wore, her fair hair was
brushed; indeed, had it not been for the sun blisters on her face and
hands, one would scarcely have believed that this was the same child
whom indaba-zimbi and i had dragged for hour after hour through the
burning, waterless desert.
"we must breakfast alone, mr. allan," she said; "my father is so upset
by your arrival that he will not get up yet. oh, you cannot tell how
thankful i am that you have come. i have been so anxious about him of
late. he grows weaker and weaker; it seems to me as though the strength
were ebbing away from him. now he scarcely leaves the kraal, i have to
manage everything about the farm; he does nothing but read and think."
just then hendrika entered, bearing a jug of coffee in one hand and of
milk in the other, which she set down upon the table, casting a look of
little love at me as she did so.
"be careful, hendrika; you are spilling the coffee," said stella. "don't
you wonder how we come to have coffee here, mr. allan? i will tell
you--we grow it. that was my idea. oh, i have lots of things to show
you. you don't know what we have managed to do in the time that we have
been here. you see we have plenty of labour, for the people about look
upon my father as their chief."
"yes," i said, "but how do you get all these luxuries of civilization?"
and i pointed to the books, the crockery, and the knives and forks.
"very simply. most of the books my father brought with him when we first
trekked into the wilds; there was nearly a waggon load of them. but
every few years we have sent an expedition of three waggons right down
to port natal. the waggons are loaded with ivory and other goods, and
come back with all kinds of things that been sent out from england
for us. so you see, although we live in this wild place, we are not
altogether cut off. we can send runners to natal and back in three
months, and the waggons get there and back in a year. the last lot
arrived quite safe about three months ago. our servants are very
faithful, and some of them speak dutch well."
"have you ever been with the waggons?" i asked.
"since i was a child i have never been more than thirty miles from
babyan's peak," she answered. "do you know, mr. allan, that you are,
with one exception, the first englishman that i have known out of a
book. i suppose that i must seem very wild and savage to you, but i have
had one advantage--a good education. my father has taught me everything,
and perhaps i know some things that you don't. i can read french and
german, for instance. i think that my father's first idea was to let me
run wild altogether, but he gave it up."
"and don't you wish to go into the world?" i asked.
"sometimes," she said, "when i get lonely. but perhaps my father is
right--perhaps it would frighten and bewilder me. at any rate he would
never return to civilization; it is his idea, you know, although i am
sure i do not know where he got it from, nor why he cannot bear that
our name should be spoken. in short, mr. quatermain, we do not make our
lives, we must take them as we find them. have you done your breakfast?
let us go out, and i will show you our home."
i rose and went to my sleeping-place to fetch my hat. when i returned,
mr. carson--for after all that was his name, though he would never allow
it to be spoken--had come into the hut. he felt better now, he said, and
would accompany us on our walk if stella would give him an arm.
so we started, and after us came hendrika with tota and old indaba-zimbi
whom i found sitting outside as fresh as paint. nothing could tire that
old man.
the view from the platform was almost as beautiful as that from the
lower ground looking up to the peak. the marble kraals, as i have said,
faced west, consequently all the upper terrace lay in the shadow of the
great peak till nearly eleven o'clock in the morning--a great advantage
in that warm latitude. first we walked through the garden, which was
beautifully cultivated, and one of the most productive that i ever saw.
there were three or four natives working in it, and they all saluted
my host as "baba," or father. then we visited the other two groups of
marble huts. one of these was used for stables and outbuildings, the
other as storehouses, the centre hut having been, however, turned into
a chapel. mr. carson was not ordained, but he earnestly tried to convert
the natives, most of whom were refugees who had come to him for shelter,
and he had practised the more elementary rites of the church for so long
that i think he began to believe that he really was a clergyman. for
instance, he always married those of his people who would consent to a
monogamous existence, and baptized their children.
when we had examined those wonderful remains of antiquity, the marble
huts, and admired the orange trees, the vines and fruits which thrive
like weeds in this marvellous soil and climate, we descended to the next
platform, and saw the farming operations in full swing. i think that it
was the best farm i have ever seen in africa. there was ample water
for purposes of irrigation, the grass lands below gave pasturage for
hundreds of head of cattle and horses, and, for natives, the people were
most industrious. moreover, the whole place was managed by mr. carson on
the co-operative system; he only took a tithe of the produce--indeed, in
this land of teeming plenty, what was he to do with more? consequently
the tribesmen, who, by the way, called themselves the "children of
thomas," were able to accumulate considerable wealth. all their disputes
were referred to their "father," and he also was judge of offences and
crimes. some were punished by imprisonment, whipping, and loss of goods,
other and graver transgressions by expulsion from the community, a fiat
which to one of these favoured natives must have seemed as heavy as the
decree that drove adam from the garden of eden.
old mr. carson leaned upon his daughter's arm and contemplated the scene
with pride.
"i have done all this, allan quatermain," he said. "when renouncing
civilization, i wandered here by chance; seeking a home in the remotest
places of the world, i found this lonely spot a wilderness. nothing
was to be seen except the site, the domes of the marble huts, and the
waterfalls. i took possession of the huts. i cleared the path of garden
land and planted the orange grove. i had only six natives then, but by
degrees others joined me, now my tribe is a thousand strong. here we
live in profound peace and plenty. i have all i need, and i seek no
more. heaven has prospered me so far--may it do so to the end, which for
me draws nigh. and now i am tired and will go back. if you wish to see
the old quarry and the mouth of the ancient mines, stella will show them
to you. no, my love, you need not trouble to come, i can manage. look!
some of the headmen are waiting to see me."
so he went; but still followed by hendrika and indaba-zimbi, we turned,
and, walking along the bank of one of the rivers, passed up behind the
marble kraals, and came to the quarry, whence the material of which they
were built had been cut in some remote age. the pit opened up a very
thick seam of the whitest and most beautiful marble. i know another
like it in natal. but by whom it had been worked i cannot say; not
by natives, that is certain, though the builders of these kraals had
condescended to borrow the shape of native huts for their model. by
the way, the only relic of those builders that i ever saw was a highly
finished bronze pick-axe which stella had found one day in the quarry.
after we had examined this quarry we climbed the slope of the hill
till we came to the mouth of the ancient mines which were situated in a
gorge. i believe them to have been silver mines. the gorge was long and
narrow, and the moment we entered it there rose from every side a sound
of groaning and barking that was almost enough to deafen us. i knew what
it was at once: the whole place was filled with baboons, which clambered
down the rocks towards us from every direction, and in a manner that
struck me as being unnaturally fearless. stella turned a little pale and
clung to my arm.
"it is very silly of me," she whispered. "i am not at all nervous, but
ever since they killed hendrik i cannot bear the sight of those animals.
i always think that there is something human about them."
meanwhile the baboons drew nearer, talking to each other as they came.
tota began to cry, and clung to stella. stella clung to me, while i
and indaba-zimbi put as bold a front on the matter as we could. only
hendrika stood looking at the brutes with an unconcerned smile on her
monkey face. when the great apes were quite near, she suddenly called
aloud. instantly they stopped their hideous clamour as though at a word
of command. then hendrika addressed them: i can only describe it so.
that is to say, she began to make a noise such as baboons do when they
converse with each other. i have known hottentots and bushmen who said
that they could talk with the baboons and understand their language, but
i confess i never heard it done before or since.
from the mouth of hendrika came a succession of grunts, groans,
squeals, clicks, and every other abominable noise that can be conceived,
conveying to my mind a general idea of expostulation. at any rate the
baboons listened. one of them grunted back some answer, and then the
whole mob drew off to the rocks.
i stood astonished, and without a word we turned back to the kraal, for
hendrika was too close to allow me to speak. when we reached the dining
hut stella went in, followed by hendrika. but indaba-zimbi plucked me by
the sleeve, and i stopped outside.
"macumazahn," he said. "baboon-woman--devil-woman. be careful,
macumazahn. she loves that star (the natives aptly enough called stella
the star), and is jealous. be careful, macumazahn, or the star will
set!"
chapter ix
"let us go in, allan!"
it is very difficult for me to describe the period of time which elapsed
between my arrival at babyan's peak and my marriage with stella. when i
look back on it, it seems sweet as with the odour of flowers, and dim
as with the happy dusk of summer eves, while through the sweetness comes
the sound of stella's voice, and through the gloom shines the starlight
of her eyes. i think that we loved each other from the first, though for
a while we said no word of love. day by day i went about the place with
her, accompanied by little tota and hendrika only, while she attended
to the thousand and one matters which her father's ever-growing weakness
had laid upon her; or rather, as time drew on, i attended to the
business, and she accompanied me. all day through we were together. then
after supper, when the night had fallen, we would walk together in the
garden and come at length to hear her father read aloud sometimes from
the works of a poet, sometimes from history. or, if he did not feel
well, stella would read, and when this was done, mr. carson would
celebrate a short form of prayer, and we would separate till the morning
once more brought our happy hour of meeting.
so the weeks went by, and with every week i grew to know my darling
better. often, i wonder now, if my fond fancy deceives me, or if indeed
there are women as sweet and dear as she. was it solitude that had given
such depth and gentleness to her? was it the long years of communing
with nature that had endowed her with such peculiar grace, the grace we
find in opening flowers and budding trees? had she caught that murmuring
voice from the sound of the streams which fall continually about her
rocky home? was it the tenderness of the evening sky beneath which she
loved to walk, that lay like a shadow on her face, and the light of the
evening stars that shone in her quiet eyes? at the least to me she was
the realization of that dream which haunts the sleep of sin-stained men;
so my memory paints her, so i hope to find her when at last the sleep
has rolled away and the fevered dreams are done.
at last there came a day--the most blessed of my life, when we told our
love. we had been together all the morning, but after dinner mr. carson
was so unwell that stella stopped in with him. at supper we met again,
and after supper, when she had put little tota, to whom she had grown
much attached, to bed, we went out, leaving mr. carson dozing on the
couch.
the night was warm and lovely, and without speaking we walked up the
garden to the orange grove and sat down upon a rock. there was a little
breeze which shook the petals of the orange blooms over us in showers,
and bore their delicate fragrance far and wide. silence reigned around,
broken only by the sound of the falling waterfalls that now died to a
faint murmur, and now, as the wavering breeze turned, boomed loudly
in our ears. the moon was not yet visible, but already the dark clouds
which floated through the sky above us--for there had been rain--showed
a glow of silver, telling us that she shone brightly behind the peak.
stella began to talk in her low, gentle voice, speaking to me of her
life in the wilderness, how she had grown to love it, how her mind had
gone on from idea to idea, and how she pictured the great rushing world
that she had never seen as it was reflected to her from the books which
she had read. it was a curious vision of life that she had: things were
out of proportion to it; it was more like a dream than a reality--a
mirage than the actual face of things. the idea of great cities, and
especially of london, had a kind of fascination for her: she could
scarcely realize the rush, the roar and hurry, the hard crowds of men
and women, strangers to each other, feverishly seeking for wealth and
pleasure beneath a murky sky, and treading one another down in the fury
of their competition.
"what is it all for?" she asked earnestly. "what do they seek? having so
few years to live, why do they waste them thus?"
i told her that in the majority of instances it was actual hard
necessity that drove them on, but she could barely understand me. living
as she had done, in the midst of the teeming plenty of a fruitful earth,
she did not seem to be able to grasp the fact that there were millions
who from day to day know not how to stay their hunger.
"i never want to go there," she went on; "i should be bewildered and
frightened to death. it is not natural to live like that. god put adam
and eve in a garden, and that is how he meant their children to live--in
peace, and looking always on beautiful things. this is my idea of
perfect life. i want no other."
"i thought you once told me that you found it lonely," i said.
"so i did," she answered, innocently, "but that was before you came. now
i am not lonely any more, and it is perfect--perfect as the night."
just then the full moon rose above the elbow of the peak, and her
rays stole far and wide down the misty valley, gleaming on the water,
brooding on the plain, searching out the hidden places of the rocks,
wrapping the fair form of nature as in a silver bridal veil through
which her beauty shone mysteriously.
stella looked down the terraced valley; she turned and looked up at the
scarred face of the golden moon, and then she looked at me. the beauty
of the night was about her face, the scent of the night was on her hair,
the mystery of the night shone in her shadowed eyes. she looked at me, i
looked on her, and all our hearts' love blossomed within us. we spoke no
word--we had no words to speak, but slowly we drew near, till lips were
pressed to lips as we kissed our eternal troth.
it was she who broke that holy silence, speaking in a changed voice,
in soft deep notes that thrilled me like the lowest chords of a smitten
harp.
"ah, now i understand," she said, "now i know why we are lonely, and how
we can lose our loneliness. now i know what it is that stirs us in the
beauty of the sky, in the sound of water and in the scent of flowers.
it is love who speaks in everything, though till we hear his voice we
understand nothing. but when we hear, then the riddle is answered and
the gates of our heart are opened, and, allan, we see the way that wends
through death to heaven, and is lost in the glory of which our love is
but a shadow.
"let us go in, allan. let us go before the spell breaks, so that
whatever overtakes us, sorrow, death, or separation, we may always have
this perfect memory to save us. come, dearest, let us go!"
i rose like a man in a dream, still holding her by the hand. but as i
rose my eye fell upon something that gleamed white among the foliage
of the orange bush at my side. i said nothing, but looked. the breeze
stirred the orange leaves, the moonlight struck for a moment full upon
the white object.
it was the face of hendrika, the babyan-woman, as indaba-zimbi had
called her, and on it was a glare of hate that made me shudder.
i said nothing; the face vanished, and just then i heard a baboon bark
in the rocks behind.
then we went down the garden, and stella passed into the centre hut. i
saw hendrika standing in the shadow near the door, and went up to her.
"hendrika," i said, "why were you watching miss stella and myself in the
garden?"
she drew her lips up till her teeth gleamed in the moonlight.
"have i not watched her these many years, macumazahn? shall i cease to
watch because a wandering white man comes to steal her? why were you
kissing her in the garden, macumazahn? how dare you kiss her who is a
star?"
"i kissed her because i love her, and because she loves me," i answered.
"what has that to do with you, hendrika?"
"because you love her," she hissed in answer; "and do i not love her
also, who saved me from the babyans? i am a woman as she is, and you are
a man, and they say in the kraals that men love women better than women
love women. but it is a lie, though this is true, that if a woman loves
a man she forgets all other love. have i not seen it? i gather her
flowers--beautiful flowers; i climb the rocks where you would never dare
to go to find them; you pluck a piece of orange bloom in the garden and
give it to her. what does she do?--she takes the orange bloom, she puts
it in her breast, and lets my flowers die. i call to her--she does not
hear me--she is thinking. you whisper to some one far away, and she
hears and smiles. she used to kiss me sometimes; now she kisses that
white brat you brought, because you brought it. oh, i see it all--all; i
have seen it from the first; you are stealing her from us, stealing her
to yourself, and those who loved her before you came are forgotten. be
careful, macumazahn, be careful, lest i am revenged upon you. you, you
hate me; you think me half a monkey; that servant of yours calls me
baboon-woman. well, i have lived with baboons, and they are clever--yes,
they can play tricks and know things that you don't, and i am cleverer
than they, for i have learnt the wisdom of white people also, and i say
to you, walk softly, macumazahn, or you will fall into a pit," and with
one more look of malice she was gone.
i stood for a moment reflecting. i was afraid of this strange creature
who seemed to combine the cunning of the great apes that had reared
her with the passions and skill of human kind. i foreboded evil at her
hands. and yet there was something almost touching in the fierceness of
her jealousy. it is generally supposed that this passion only exists in
strength when the object loved is of another sex from the lover, but i
confess that, both in this instance and in some others which i have met
with, this has not been my experience. i have known men, and especially
uncivilized men, who were as jealous of the affection of their friend
or master as any lover could be of that of his mistress; and who has
not seen cases of the same thing where parents and their children are
concerned? but the lower one gets in the scale of humanity, the more
readily this passion thrives; indeed, it may be said to come to its
intensest perfection in brutes. women are more jealous than men,
small-hearted men are more jealous than those of larger mind and wider
sympathy, and animals are the most jealous of all. now hendrika was in
some ways not far removed from animal, which may perhaps account for the
ferocity of her jealousy of her mistress's affection.
shaking off my presentiments of evil, i entered the centre hut. mr.
carson was resting on the sofa, and by him knelt stella holding his
hand, and her head resting on his breast. i saw at once that she had
been telling him of what had come about between us; nor was i sorry,
for it is a task that a would-be son-in-law is generally glad to do by
deputy.
"come here, allan quatermain," he said, almost sternly, and my heart
gave a jump, for i feared lest he might be about to require me to go
about my business. but i came.
"stella tells me," he went on, "that you two have entered into a
marriage engagement. she tells me also that she loves you, and that you
say that you love her."
"i do indeed, sir," i broke in; "i love her truly; if ever a woman was
loved in this world, i love her."
"i thank heaven for it," said the old man. "listen, my children. many
years ago a great shame and sorrow fell upon me, so great a sorrow that,
as i sometimes think, it affected my brain. at any rate, i determined
to do what most men would have considered the act of a madman, to go far
away into the wilderness with my only child, there to live remote from
civilization and its evils. i did so; i found this place, and here we
have lived for many years, happily enough, and perhaps not without doing
good in our generation, but still in a way unnatural to our race and
status. at first i thought i would let my daughter grow up in a state of
complete ignorance, that she should be nature's child. but as time went
on, i saw the folly and the wickedness of my plan. i had no right to
degrade her to the level of the savages around me, for if the fruit
of the tree of knowledge is a bitter fruit, still it teaches good from
evil. so i educated her as well as i was able, till in the end i knew
that in mind, as in body, she was in no way inferior to her sisters, the
children of the civilized world. she grew up and entered into womanhood,
and then it came into my mind that i was doing her a bitter wrong, that
i was separating her from her kind and keeping her in a wilderness where
she could find neither mate nor companion. but though i knew this, i
could not yet make up my mind to return to active life; i had grown to
love this place. i dreaded to return into the world i had abjured. again
and again i put my resolutions aside. then at the commencement of this
year i fell ill. for a while i waited, hoping that i might get better,
but at last i realized that i should never get better, that the hand of
death was upon me."
"ah, no, father, not that!" stella said, with a cry.
"yes, love, that, and it is true. now you will be able to forget our
separation in the happiness of a new meeting," and he glanced at me
and smiled. "well, when this knowledge came home to me, i determined to
abandon this place and trek for the coast, though i well knew that
the journey would kill me. i should never live to reach it. but stella
would, and it would be better than leaving her here alone with savages
in the wilderness. on the very day that i had made up my mind to take
this step stella found you dying in the bad lands, allan quatermain, and
brought you here. she brought you, of all men in the world, you, whose
father had been my dear friend, and who once with your baby hands had
saved her life from fire, that she might live to save yours from thirst.
at the time i said little, but i saw the hand of providence in this, and
i determined to wait and see what came about between you. at the worst,
if nothing came about, i soon learned that i could trust you to see her
safely to the coast after i was gone. but many days ago i knew how it
stood between you, and now things are determined as i prayed they might
be. god bless you both, my children; may you be happy in your love;
may it endure till death and beyond it. god bless you both!" and he
stretched out his hand towards me.
i took it, and stella kissed him.
presently he spoke again--
"it is my intention," he said, "if you two consent, to marry you next
sunday. i wish to do so soon, for i do not know how much longer will be
allowed to me. i believe that such a ceremony, solemnly celebrated
and entered into before witnesses, will, under the circumstances, be
perfectly legal; but of course you will repeat it with every formality
the first moment it lies in your power so to do. and now, there is
one more thing: when i left england my fortunes were in a shattered
condition; in the course of years they have recovered themselves,
the accumulated rents, as i heard but recently, when the waggons last
returned from port natal, have sufficed to pay off all charges, and
there is a considerable balance over. consequently you will not marry on
nothing, for of course you, stella, are my heiress, and i wish to make
a stipulation. it is this. that so soon as my death occurs you should
leave this place and take the first opportunity of returning to england.
i do not ask you to live there always; it might prove too much for
people reared in the wilds, as both of you have been; but i do ask you
to make it your permanent home. do you consent and promise this?"
"i do," i answered.
"and so do i," said stella.
"very well," he answered; "and now i am tired out. again god bless you
both, and good-night."
chapter x
hendrika plots evil
on the following morning i had a conversation with indaba-zimbi. first
of all i told him that i was going to marry stella.
"oh!" he said, "i thought so, macumazahn. did i not tell you that you
would find happiness on this journey? most men must be content to watch
the star from a long way off, to you it is given to wear her on your
heart. but remember, macumazahn, remember that stars set."
"can you not stop your croaking even for a day?" i answered, angrily,
for his words sent a thrill of fear through me.
"a true prophet must tell the ill as well as the good, macumazahn. i
only speak what is on my mind. but what of it? what is life but loss,
loss upon loss, till life itself be lost? but in death we may find all
the things that we have lost. so your father taught, macumazahn, and
there was wisdom in his gentleness. ou! i do not believe in death; it is
change, that is all, macumazahn. look now, the rain falls, the drops of
rain that were one water in the clouds fall side by side. they sink into
the ground; presently the sun will come out, the earth will be dry, the
drops will be gone. a fool looks and says the drops are dead, they will
never be one again, they will never again fall side by side. but i am a
rain-maker, and i know the ways of rain. it is not true. the drops will
drain by many paths into the river, and will be one water there. they
will go up to the clouds again in the mists of morning, and there will
again be as they have been. we are the drops of rain, macumazahn. when
we fall that is our life. when we sink into the ground that is death,
and when we are drawn up again to the sky, what is that, macumazahn? no!
no! when we find we lose, and when we seem to lose, then we shall really
find. i am not a christian, macumazahn, but i am old, and have watched
and seen things that perhaps christians do not see. there, i have
spoken. be happy with your star, and if it sets, wait, macumazahn, wait
till it rises again. it will not be long; one day you will go to sleep,
then your eyes will open on another sky, and there your star will be
shining, macumazahn."
i made no answer at the time. i could not bear to talk of such a thing.
but often and often in the after years i have thought of indaba-zimbi
and his beautiful simile and gathered comfort from it. he was a strange
man, this old rain-making savage, and there was more wisdom in him than
in many learned atheists--those spiritual destroyers who, in the name
of progress and humanity, would divorce hope from life, and leave us
wandering in a lonesome, self-consecrated hell.
"indaba-zimbi," i said, changing the subject, "i have something to say,"
and i told him of the threats of hendrika.
he listened with an unmoved face, nodding his white lock at intervals as
the narrative went on. but i saw that he was disturbed by it.
"macumazahn," he said at length, "i have told you that this is an evil
woman. she was nourished on baboon milk, and the baboon nature is in
her veins. such creatures should be killed, not kept. she will make you
mischief if she can. but i will watch her, macumazahn. look, the star is
waiting for you; go, or she will hate me as hendrika hates you."
so i went, nothing loth, for attractive as was the wisdom of
indaba-zimbi, i found a deeper meaning in stella's simplest word. all
the rest of that day i passed in her company, and the greater part of
the two following days. at last came saturday night, the eve of our
marriage. it rained that night, so we did not go out, but spent the
evening in the hut. we sat hand in hand, saying little, but mr. carson
talked a good deal, telling us tales of his youth, and of countries
that he had visited. then he read aloud from the bible, and bade us
goodnight. i also kissed stella and went to bed. i reached my hut by
the covered way, and before i undressed opened the door to see what the
night was like. it was very dark, and rain was still falling, but as
the light streamed out into the gloom i fancied that i caught sight of
a dusky form gliding away. the thought of hendrika flashed into my mind;
could she be skulking about outside there? now i had said nothing of
hendrika and her threats either to mr. carson or stella, because i did
not wish to alarm them. also i knew that stella was attached to this
strange person, and i did not wish to shake her confidence in her unless
it was absolutely necessary. for a minute or two i stood hesitating,
then, reflecting that if it was hendrika, there she should stop, i went
in and put up the stout wooden bar that was used to secure the door. for
the last few nights old indaba-zimbi had made a habit of sleeping in the
covered passage, which was the only other possible way of access. as i
came to bed i had stepped over him rolled up in his blanket, and to all
appearances fast asleep. so it being evident that i had nothing to fear,
i promptly dismissed the matter from my mind, which, as may be imagined,
was indeed fully occupied with other thoughts.
i got into bed, and for awhile lay awake thinking of the great happiness
in store for me, and of the providential course of events that had
brought it within my reach. a few weeks since and i was wandering in
the desert a dying man, bearing a dying child, and with scarcely a
possession left in the world except a store of buried ivory that i never
expected to see again. and now i was about to wed one of the sweetest
and loveliest women on the whole earth--a woman whom i loved more than
i could have thought possible, and who loved me back again. also, as
though that were not good fortune enough, i was to acquire with her
very considerable possessions, quite sufficiently large to enable us to
follow any plan of life we found agreeable. as i lay and reflected on
all this i grew afraid of my good fortune. old indaba-zimbi's melancholy
prophecies came into my mind. hitherto he had always prophesied truly.
what if these should be true also? i turned cold as i thought of it, and
prayed to the power above to preserve us both to live and love together.
never was prayer more needed. while its words were still upon my lips i
dropped asleep and dreamed a most dreadful dream.
i dreamed that stella and i were standing together to be married.
she was dressed in white, and radiant with beauty, but it was a wild,
spiritual beauty which frightened me. her eyes shone like stars, a pale
flame played about her features, and the wind that blew did not stir her
hair. nor was this all, for her white robes were death wrappings, and
the altar at which we stood was formed of the piled-up earth from an
open grave that yawned between us. so we stood waiting for one to wed
us, but no one came. presently from the open grave sprang the form of
hendrika. in her hand was a knife, with which she stabbed at me, but
pierced the heart of stella, who, without a cry, fell backwards into the
grave, still looking at me as she fell. then hendrika leaped after her
into the grave. i heard her feet strike heavily.
"_awake, macumazahn! awake!_" cried the voice of indaba-zimbi.
i awoke and bounded from the bed, a cold perspiration pouring from me.
in the darkness on the other side of the hut i heard sounds of furious
struggling. luckily i kept my head. just by me was a chair on which were
matches and a rush taper. i struck a match and held it to the taper. now
in the growing light i could see two forms rolling one over the other on
the floor, and from between them came the flash of steel. the fat melted
and the light burnt up. it was indaba-zimbi and the woman hendrika who
were struggling, and, what is more, the woman was getting the better of
the man, strong as he was. i rushed towards them. now she was uppermost,
now she had wrenched herself from his fierce grip, and now the great
knife she had in her hand flashed up.
but i was behind her, and, placing my hands beneath her arms, jerked
with all my strength. she fell backwards, and, in her effort to save
herself, most fortunately dropped the knife. then we flung ourselves
upon her. heavens! the strength of that she-devil! nobody who has not
experienced it could believe it. she fought and scratched and bit,
and at one time nearly mastered the two of us. as it was she did break
loose. she rushed at the bed, sprung on it, and bounded thence straight
up at the roof of the hut. i never saw such a jump, and could not
conceive what she meant to do. in the roof were the peculiar holes which
i have described. they were designed to admit light, and covered with
overhanging eaves. she sprung straight and true like a monkey, and,
catching the edge of the hole with her hands, strove to draw herself
through it. but here her strength, exhausted with the long struggle,
failed her. for a moment she swung, then dropped to the ground and fell
senseless.
"ou!" gasped indaba-zimbi. "let us tie the devil up before she comes to
life again."
i thought this a good counsel, so we took a reim that lay in the corner
of the room, and lashed her hands and feet in such a fashion that even
she could scarcely escape. then we carried her into the passage, and
indaba-zimbi sat over her, the knife in his hand, for i did not wish to
raise an alarm at that hour of the night.
"do you know how i caught her, macumazahn?" he said. "for several nights
i have slept here with one eye open, for i thought she had made a plan.
to-night i kept wide awake, though i pretended to be asleep. an hour
after you got into the blankets the moon rose, and i saw a beam of light
come into the hut through the hole in the roof. presently i saw the beam
of light vanish. at first i thought that a cloud was passing over the
moon, but i listened and heard a noise as though some one was squeezing
himself through a narrow space. presently he was through, and hanging by
his hands. then the light came in again, and in the middle of it i saw
the babyan-frau swinging from the roof, and about to drop into the
hut. she clung by both hands, and in her mouth was a great knife. she
dropped, and i ran forward to seize her as she dropped, and gripped her
round the middle. but she heard me come, and, seizing the knife, struck
at me in the dark and missed me. then we struggled, and you know the
rest. you were very nearly dead to-night, macumazahn."
"very nearly indeed," i answered, still panting, and arranging the rags
of my night-dress round me as best i might. then the memory of my horrid
dream flashed into my mind. doubtless it had been conjured up by the
sound of hendrika dropping to the floor--in my dream it had been a grave
that she dropped into. all of it, then, had been experienced in that
second of time. well, dreams are swift; perhaps time itself is nothing
but a dream, and events that seem far apart really occur simultaneously.
we passed the rest of the night watching hendrika. presently she came
to herself and struggled furiously to break the reim. but the untanned
buffalo hide was too strong even for her, and, moreover, indaba-zimbi
unceremoniously sat upon her to keep her quiet. at last she gave it up.
in due course the day broke--my marriage day. leaving indaba-zimbi to
watch my would-be murderess, i went and fetched some natives from the
stables, and with their aid bore hendrika to the prison hut--that
same hut in which she had been confined when she had been brought
a baboon-child from the rocks. here we shut her up, and, leaving
indaba-zimbi to watch outside, i returned to my sleeping-place and
dressed in the best garments that the babyan kraals could furnish. but
when i looked at the reflection of my face, i was horrified. it was
covered with scratches inflicted by the nails of hendrika. i doctored
them up as best i could, then went out for a walk to calm my nerves,
which, what between the events of the past night, and of those pending
that day, were not a little disturbed.
when i returned it was breakfast time. i went into the dining hut, and
there stella was waiting to greet me, dressed in simple white and with
orange flowers on her breast. she came forward to me shyly enough; then,
seeing the condition of my face, started back.
"why, allan! what have you been doing to yourself?" she asked.
as i was about to answer, her father came in leaning on his stick, and,
catching sight of me, instantly asked the same question.
then i told them everything, both of hendrika's threats and of her
fierce attempt to carry them into execution. but i did not tell my
horrid dream.
stella's face grew white as the flowers on her breast, but that of her
father became very stern.
"you should have spoken of this before, allan," he said. "i now see that
i did wrong to attempt to civilize this wicked and revengeful creature,
who, if she is human, has all the evil passions of the brutes that
reared her. well, i will make an end of it this very day."
"oh, father," said stella, "don't have her killed. it is all dreadful
enough, but that would be more dreadful still. i have been very fond of
her, and, bad as she is, she has loved me. do not have her killed on my
marriage day."
"no," her father answered, "she shall not be killed, for though she
deserves to die, i will not have her blood upon our hands. she is a
brute, and has followed the nature of brutes. she shall go back whence
she came."
no more was said on the matter at the time, but when breakfast--which
was rather a farce--was done, mr. carson sent for his headman and gave
him certain orders.
we were to be married after the service which mr. carson held every
sunday morning in the large marble hut set apart for that purpose. the
service began at ten o'clock, but long before that hour all the natives
on the place came up in troops, singing as they came, to be present at
the wedding of the "star." it was a pretty sight to see them, the men
dressed in all their finery, and carrying shields and sticks in their
hands, and the women and children bearing green branches of trees,
ferns, and flowers. at length, about half-past nine, stella rose,
pressed my hand, and left me to my reflections. a few minutes to ten she
reappeared again with her father, dressed in a white veil, a wreath of
orange flowers on her dark curling hair, a bouquet of orange flowers
in her hand. to me she seemed like a dream of loveliness. with her came
little tota in a high state of glee and excitement. she was stella's
only bridesmaid. then we all passed out towards the church hut. the bare
space in front of it was filled with hundreds of natives, who set up
a song as we came. but we went on into the hut, which was crowded with
such of the natives as usually worshipped there. here mr. carson, as
usual, read the service, though he was obliged to sit down in order to
do so. when it was done--and to me it seemed interminable--mr. carson
whispered that he meant to marry us outside the hut in sight of all the
people. so we went out and took our stand under the shade of a large
tree that grew near the hut facing the bare space where the natives were
gathered.
mr. carson held up his hand to enjoin silence. then, speaking in the
native dialect, he told them that he was about to make us man and wife
after the christian fashion and in the sight of all men. this done, he
proceeded to read the marriage service over us, and very solemnly and
beautifully he did it. we said the words, i placed the ring--it was her
father's signet ring, for we had no other--upon stella's finger, and it
was done.
then mr. carson spoke. "allan and stella," he said, "i believe that the
ceremony which has been performed makes you man and wife in the sight
of god and man, for all that is necessary to make a marriage binding
is, that it should be celebrated according to the custom of the country
where the parties to it reside. it is according to the custom that has
been in force here for fifteen years or more that you have been married
in the face of all the people, and in token of it you will both sign the
register that i have kept of such marriages, among those of my people
who have adopted the christian faith. still, in case there should be
any legal flaw i again demand the solemn promise of you both that on the
first opportunity you will cause this marriage to be re-celebrated in
some civilized land. do you promise?"
"we do," we answered.
then the book was brought out and we signed our names. at first my
wife signed hers "stella" only, but her father bade her write it stella
carson for the first and last time in her life. then several of the
indunas, or headmen, including old indaba-zimbi, put their marks in
witness. indaba-zimbi drew his mark in the shape of a little star, in
humorous allusion to stella's native name. that register is before
me now as i write. that, with a lock of my darling's hair which lies
between its leaves, is my dearest possession. there are all the names
and marks as they were written many years ago beneath the shadow of the
tree at babyan kraals in the wilderness, but alas! and alas! where are
those who wrote them?
"my people," said mr. carson, when the signing was done, and we had
kissed each other before them all--"my people, macumazahn and the star,
my daughter, are now man and wife, to live in one kraal, to eat of
one bowl, to share one fortune till they reach the grave. hear now, my
people, you know this woman," and turning he pointed to hendrika, who,
unseen by us, had been led out of the prison hut.
"yes, yes, we know her," said a little ring of headmen, who formed
the primitive court of justice, and after the fashion of natives had
squatted themselves in a circle on the ground in front of us. "we know
her, she is the white babyan-woman, she is hendrika, the body servant of
the star."
"you know her," said mr. carson, "but you do not know her altogether.
stand forward, indaba-zimbi, and tell the people what came about last
night in the hut of macumazahn."
accordingly old indaba-zimbi came forward, and, squatting down, told his
moving tale with much descriptive force and many gestures, finishing up
by producing the great knife from which his watchfulness had saved me.
then i was called upon, and in a few brief words substantiated his
story: indeed my face did that in the sight of all men.
then mr. carson turned to hendrika, who stood in sullen silence, her
eyes fixed upon the ground, and asked her if she had anything to say.
she looked up boldly and answered--
"macumazahn has robbed me of the love of my mistress. i would have
robbed him of his life, which is a little thing compared to that which i
have lost at his hands. i have failed, and i am sorry for it, for had i
killed him and left no trace the star would have forgotten him and shone
on me again."
"never," murmured stella in my ear; but mr. carson turned white with
wrath.
"my people," he said, "you hear the words of this woman. you hear how
she pays me back, me and my daughter whom she swears she loves. she says
that she would have murdered a man who has done her no evil, the man who
is the husband of her mistress. we saved her from the babyans, we tamed
her, we fed her, we taught her, and this is how she pays us back. say,
my people, what reward should be given to her?"
"death," said the circle of indunas, pointing their thumbs downwards,
and all the multitude beyond echoed the word "death."
"death," repeated the head induna, adding, "if you save her, my
father, we will slay her with our own hands. she is a babyan-woman, a
devil-woman; ah, yes, we have heard of such before; let her be slain
before she works more evil."
then it was that stella stepped forward and begged for hendrika's life
in moving terms. she pleaded the savagery of the woman's nature, her
long service, and the affection that she had always shown towards
herself. she said that i, whose life had been attempted, forgave her,
and she, my wife, who had nearly been left a widow before she was made a
bride, forgave her; let them forgive her also, let her be sent away, not
slain, let not her marriage day be stained with blood.
now her father listened readily enough, for he had no intention of
killing hendrika--indeed, he had already promised not to do so. but the
people were in a different humour, they looked upon hendrika as a devil,
and would have torn her to pieces there and then, could they have had
their way. nor were matters mended by indaba-zimbi, who had already
gained a great reputation for wisdom and magic in the place. suddenly
the old man rose and made quite an impassioned speech, urging them to
kill hendrika at once or mischief would come of it.
at last matters got very bad, for two of the indunas came forward to
drag her off to execution, and it was not until stella burst into tears
that the sight of her grief, backed by mr. carson's orders and my own
remonstrances, carried the day.
all this while hendrika had been standing quite unmoved. at last the
tumult ceased, and the leading induna called to her to go, promising
that if ever she showed her face near the kraals again she should be
stabbed like a jackal. then hendrika spoke to stella in a low voice and
in english--
"better let them kill me, mistress, better for all. without you to love
i shall go mad and become a babyan again."
stella did not answer, and they loosed her. she stepped forward and
looked at the natives with a stare of hate. then she turned and walked
past me, and as she passed whispered a native phrase in my ear, that,
being literally translated, means, "till another moon," but which has
the same significance as the french "au revoir."
it frightened me, for i knew she meant that she had not done with me,
and saw that our mercy was misplaced. seeing my face change she ran
swiftly from me, and as she passed indaba-zimbi, with a sudden movement
snatched her great knife from his hand. when she had gone about twenty
paces she halted, looked long and earnestly on stella, gave one loud cry
of anguish, and fled. a few minutes later we saw her far away, bounding
up the face of an almost perpendicular cliff--a cliff that nobody except
herself and the baboons could possibly climb.
"look," said indaba-zimbi in my ear--"look, macumazahn, there goes the
babyan-frau. but, macumazahn, _she will come back again_. ah, why
will you not listen to my words. have they not always been true words,
macumazahn?" and he shrugged his shoulders and turned away.
for a while i was much disturbed, but at any rate hendrika was gone for
the present, and stella, my dear and lovely wife, was there at my side,
and in her smiles i forgot my fears.
for the rest of that day, why should i write of it?--there are things
too happy and too sacred to be written of.
at last i had, if only for a little while, found that rest, that perfect
joy which we seek so continually and so rarely clasp.
chapter xi
gone!
i wonder if many married couples are quite as happy as we found
ourselves. cynics, a growing class, declare that few illusions can
survive a honeymoon. well, i do not know about it, for i only married
once, and can but speak from my limited experience. but certainly our
illusion, or rather the great truth of which it is the shadow, did
survive, as to this day it survives in my heart across all the years of
utter separation, and across the unanswering gulf of gloom.
but complete happiness is not allowed in this world even for an hour.
as our marriage day had been shadowed by the scene which has been
described, so our married life was shadowed by its own sorrow.
three days after our wedding mr. carson had a stroke. it had been long
impending, now it fell. we came into the centre hut to dinner and found
him lying speechless on the couch. at first i thought that he was dying,
but this was not so. on the contrary, within four days he recovered his
speech and some power of movement. but he never recovered his memory,
though he still knew stella, and sometimes myself. curiously enough he
remembered little tota best of all three, though occasionally he thought
that she was his own daughter in her childhood, and would ask her where
her mother was. this state of affairs lasted for some seven months.
the old man gradually grew weaker, but he did not die. of course his
condition quite precluded the idea of our leaving babyan kraals till all
was over. this was the more distressing to me because i had a nervous
presentiment that stella was incurring danger by staying there, and also
because the state of her health rendered it desirable that we should
reach a civilized region as soon as possible. however, it could not be
helped.
at length the end came very suddenly. we were sitting one evening by
mr. carson's bedside in his hut, when to our astonishment he sat up and
spoke in a strong, full voice.
"i hear you," he said. "yes, yes, i forgive you. poor woman! you too
have suffered," and he fell back dead.
i have little doubt that he was addressing his lost wife, some vision
of whom had flashed across his dying sense. stella, of course, was
overwhelmed with grief at her loss. till i came her father had been her
sole companion, and therefore, as may be imagined, the tie between them
was much closer than is usual even in the case of father and daughter.
so deeply did she mourn that i began to fear for the effect upon her
health. nor were we the only ones to grieve; all the natives on the
settlement called mr. carson "father," and as a father they lamented
him. the air resounded with the wailing of women, and the men went about
with bowed heads, saying that "the sun had set in the heavens, now only
the star (stella) remained." indaba-zimbi alone did not mourn. he said
that it was best that the inkoos should die, for what was life worth
when one lay like a log?--moreover, that it would have been well for all
if he had died sooner.
on the following day we buried him in the little graveyard near the
waterfall. it was a sad business, and stella cried very much, in spite
of all i could do to comfort her.
that night as i sat outside the hut smoking--for the weather was hot,
and stella was lying down inside--old indaba-zimbi came up, saluted, and
squatted at my feet.
"what is it, indaba-zimbi?" i said.
"this, macumazahn. when are you going to trek towards the coast?"
"i don't know," i answered. "the star is not fit to travel now, we must
wait awhile."
"no, macumazahn, you must not wait, you must go, and the star must take
her chance. she is strong. it is nothing. all will be well."
"why do you say so? why must we go?"
"for this reason, macumazahn," and he looked cautiously round and spoke
low. "the baboons have come back in thousands. all the mountain is full
of them."
"i did not know that they had gone," i said.
"yes," he answered, "they went after the marriage, all but one or two;
now they are back, all the baboons in the world, i think. i saw a whole
cliff back with them."
"is that all?" i said, for i saw that he had something behind. "i am not
afraid of a pack of baboons."
"no, macumazahn, it is not all. the babyan-frau, hendrika, is with
them."
now nothing had been heard or seen of hendrika since her expulsion, and
though at first she and her threats had haunted me somewhat, by degrees
she to a great extent had passed out of my mind, which was fully
preoccupied with stella and my father-in-law's illness. i started
violently. "how do you know this?" i asked.
"i know it because i saw her, macumazahn. she is disguised, she is
dressed up in baboon skins, and her face is stained dark. but though she
was a long way off, i knew her by her size, and i saw the white flesh
of her arm when the skins slipped aside. she has come back, macumazahn,
with all the baboons in the world, and she has come back to do evil. now
do you understand why you should trek?"
"yes," i said, "though i don't see how she and the baboons can harm
us, i think that it will be better to go. if necessary we can camp the
waggons somewhere for a while on the journey. hearken, indaba-zimbi: say
nothing of this to the star; i will not have her frightened. and hearken
again. speak to the headmen, and see that watchers are set all round the
huts and gardens, and kept there night and day. to-morrow we will get
the waggons ready, and next day we will trek."
he nodded his white lock and went to do my bidding, leaving me not a
little disturbed--unreasonably so, indeed. it was a strange story. that
this woman had the power of conversing with baboons i knew.[*] that was
not so very wonderful, seeing that the bushmen claim to be able to do
the same thing, and she had been nurtured by them. but that she had
been able to muster them, and by the strength of her human will and
intelligence muster them in order to forward her ends of revenge, seemed
to me so incredible that after reflection my fears grew light. still i
determined to trek. after all, a journey in an ox waggon would not be
such a very terrible thing to a strong woman accustomed to roughing it,
whatever her state of health. and when all was said and done i did
not like this tale of the presence of hendrika with countless hosts of
baboons.
[*] for an instance of this, see anderson's "twenty-five
years in a waggon," vol. i. p. 262.--editor.
so i went in to stella, and without saying a word to her of the baboon
story, told her i had been thinking matters over, and had come to the
conclusion that it was our duty to follow her father's instructions to
the letter, and leave babyan kraals at once. into all our talk i need
not enter, but the end of it was that she agreed with me, and declared
that she could quite well manage the journey, saying, moreover, that now
that her dear father was dead she would be glad to get away.
nothing happened to disturb us that night, and on the following morning
i was up early making preparations. the despair of the people when they
learned that we were going to leave them was something quite pitiable. i
could only console them by declaring that we were but on a journey, and
would return the following year.
"they had lived in the shadow of their father, who was dead," they
declared; "ever since they were little they had lived in his shadow. he
had received them when they were outcasts and wanderers without a mat
to lie on, or a blanket to cover them, and they had grown fat in his
shadow. then he had died, and the star, their father's daughter, had
married me, macumazahn, and they had believed that i should take their
father's place, and let them live in my shadow. what should they do when
there was no one to protect them? the tribes were kept from attacking
them by fear of the white man. if we went they would be eaten up," and
so on. alas! there was but too much foundation for their fears.
i returned to the huts at mid-day to get some dinner. stella said
that she was going to pack during the afternoon, so i did not think it
necessary to caution her about going out alone, as i did not wish to
allude to the subject of hendrika and the baboons unless i was obliged
to. i told her, however, that i would come back to help her as soon as
i could get away. then i went down to the native kraals to sort out such
cattle as had belonged to mr. carson from those which belonged to the
kaffirs, for i proposed to take them with us. it was a large herd,
and the business took an incalculable time. at length, a little before
sundown, i gave it up, and leaving indaba-zimbi to finish the job, got
on my horse and rode homewards.
arriving, i gave the horse to one of the stable boys, and went into the
central hut. there was no sign of stella, though the things she had
been packing lay about the floor. i passed first into our sleeping hut,
thence one by one into all the others, but still saw no sign of her.
then i went out, and calling to a kaffir in the garden asked him if he
had seen his mistress.
he answered "yes." he had seen her carrying flowers and walking towards
the graveyard, holding the little white girl--my daughter--as he called
her, by the hand, when the sun stood "there," and he pointed to a spot
on the horizon where it would have been about an hour and a half before.
"the two dogs were with them," he added. i turned and ran towards the
graveyard, which was about a quarter of a mile from the huts. of course
there was no reason to be anxious--evidently she had gone to lay the
flowers on her father's grave. and yet i was anxious.
when i got near the graveyard i met one of the natives, who, by my
orders, had been set round the kraals to watch the place, and noticed
that he was rubbing his eyes and yawning. clearly he had been asleep. i
asked him if he had seen his mistress, and he answered that he had not,
which under the circumstances was not wonderful. without stopping
to reproach him, i ordered the man to follow me, and went on to the
graveyard. there, on mr. carson's grave, lay the drooping flowers which
stella had been carrying, and there in the fresh mould was the spoor of
tota's veldschoon, or hide slipper. but where were they?
i ran from the graveyard and called aloud at the top of my voice, but no
answer came. meanwhile the native was more profitably engaged in tracing
their spoor. he followed it for about a hundred yards till he came to
a clump of mimosa bush that was situated between the stream and the
ancient marble quarries just over the waterfall, and at the mouth of the
ravine. here he stopped, and i heard him give a startled cry. i rushed
to the spot, passed through the trees, and saw this. the little open
space in the centre of the glade had been the scene of a struggle.
there, in the soft earth, were the marks of three pairs of human
feet--two shod, one naked--stella's, tota's, and _hendrika's_. nor was
this all. there, close by, lay the fragments of the two dogs--they were
nothing more--and one baboon, not yet quite dead, which had been
bitten in the throat by the dogs. all round was the spoor of numberless
baboons. the full horror of what had happened flashed into my mind.
my wife and tota had been carried off by the baboons. as yet they had
not been killed, for if so their remains would have been found with
those of the dogs. they had been carried off. the brutes, acting under
the direction of that woman-monkey, hendrika, had dragged them away to
some secret den, there to keep them till they died--or kill them!
for a moment i literally staggered beneath the terror of the shock. then
i roused myself from my despair. i bade the native run and alarm the
people at the kraals, telling them to come armed, and bring me guns and
ammunition. he went like the wind, and i turned to follow the spoor. for
a few yards it was plain enough--stella had been dragged along. i could
see where her heels had struck the ground; the child had, i presumed,
been carried--at least there were no marks of her feet. at the water's
edge the spoor vanished. the water was shallow, and they had gone along
in it, or at least hendrika and her victim had, in order to obliterate
the trail. i could see where a moss-grown stone had been freshly turned
over in the water-bed. i ran along the bank some way up the ravine, in
the vain hope of catching a sight of them. presently i heard a bark in
the cliffs above me; it was answered by another, and then i saw that
scores of baboons were hidden about among the rocks on either side, and
were softly swinging themselves down to bar the path. to go on unarmed
as i was would be useless. i should only be torn to pieces as the dogs
had been. so i turned and fled back towards the huts. as i drew near i
could see that my messenger had roused the settlement, for natives with
spears and kerries in their hands were running up towards the kraals.
when i reached the hut i met old indaba-zimbi, who wore a very serious
face.
"so the evil has fallen, macumazahn," he said.
"it has fallen," i answered.
"keep a good heart, macumazahn," he said again. "she is not dead, nor is
the little maid, and before they die we shall find them. remember this,
hendrika loves her. she will not harm her, or allow the babyans to harm
her. she will try to hide her away from you, that is all."
"pray god that we may find her," i groaned. "the light is going fast."
"the moon rises in three hours," he answered; "we will search by
moonlight. it is useless to start now; see, the sun sinks. let us get
the men together, eat, and make things ready. _hamba gachla_. hasten
slowly, macumazahn."
as there was no help, i took his advice. i could eat no food, but i
packed some up to take with us, and made ready ropes, and a rough kind
of litter. if we found them they would scarcely be able to walk. ah! if
we found them! how slowly the time passed! it seemed hours before the
moon rose. but at last it did rise.
then we started. in all we were about a hundred men, but we only
mustered five guns between us, my elephant roer and four that had
belonged to mr. carson.
chapter xii
the magic of indaba-zimbi
we gained the spot by the stream where stella had been taken. the
natives looked at the torn fragments of the dogs, and at the marks of
violence, and i heard them swearing to each other, that whether the
star lived or died they would not rest till they had exterminated every
baboon on babyan's peak. i echoed the oath, and, as shall be seen, we
kept it.
we started on along the stream, following the spoor of the baboons as we
best could. but the stream left no spoor, and the hard, rocky banks very
little. still we wandered on. all night we wandered through the lonely
moonlit valleys, startling the silence into a thousand echoes with our
cries. but no answer came to them. in vain our eyes searched the sides
of precipices formed of water-riven rocks fantastically piled one
upon another; in vain we searched through endless dells and fern-clad
crannies. there was nothing to be found. how could we expect to find
two human beings hidden away in the recesses of this vast stretch of
mountain ground, which no man yet had ever fully explored. they were
lost, and in all human probability lost for ever.
to and fro we wandered hopelessly, till at last dawn found us footsore
and weary nearly at the spot whence we had started. we sat down waiting
for the sun to rise, and the men ate of such food as they had brought
with them, and sent to the kraals for more.
i sat upon a stone with a breaking heart. i cannot describe my feelings.
let the reader put himself in my position and perhaps he may get some
idea of them. near me was old indaba-zimbi, who sat staring straight
before him as though he were looking into space, and taking note of
what went on there. an idea struck me. this man had some occult power.
several times during our adventures he had prophesied, and in every case
his prophecies had proved true. he it was who, when we escaped from the
zulu impi, had told me to steer north, because there we should find the
place of a white man who lived under the shadow of a great peak that was
full of baboons. perhaps he could help in this extremity--at any rate it
was worth trying.
"indaba-zimbi," i said, "you say that you can send your spirit through
the doors of space and see what we cannot see. at the least i know that
you can do strange things. can you not help me now? if you can, and will
save her, i will give you half the cattle that we have here."
"i never said anything of the sort, macumazahn," he answered. "i do
things, i do not talk about them. neither do i seek reward for what i do
like a common witch-doctor. it is well that you have asked me to use my
wisdom, macumazahn, for i should not have used it again without being
asked--no, not even for the sake of the star and yourself, whom i love,
for if so my spirit would have been angry. in the other matters i had a
part, for my life was concerned as well as yours; but in this matter i
have no part, and therefore i might not use my wisdom unless you thought
well to call upon my spirit. however, it would have been no good to ask
me before, for i have only just found the herb i want," and he produced
a handful of the leaves of a plant that was unfamiliar to me. it had
prickly leaves, shaped very much like those of the common english
nettle.
"now, macumazahn," he went on, "bid the men leave us alone, and then
follow me presently to the little glade down there by the water."
i did so. when i reached the glade i found indaba-zimbi kindling a small
fire under the shadow of a tree by the edge of the water.
"sit there, macumazahn," he said, pointing to a stone near the fire,
"and do not be surprised or frightened at anything you see. if you move
or call out we shall learn nothing."
i sat down and watched. when the fire was alight and burning brightly,
the old fellow stripped himself stark naked, and, going to the foot of
the pool, dipped himself in the water. then he came back shivering with
the cold, and, leaning over the little fire, thrust leaves of the plant
i have mentioned into his mouth and began to chew them, muttering as he
chewed. most of the remaining leaves he threw on to the fire. a dense
smoke rose from them, but he held his head in this smoke and drew
it down his lungs till i saw that he was exhibiting every sign of
suffocation. the veins in his throat and chest swelled, he gasped
loudly, and his eyes, from which tears were streaming, seemed as though
they were going to start from his head. presently he fell over on his
side, and lay senseless. i was terribly alarmed, and my first impulse
was to run to his assistance, but fortunately i remembered his caution,
and sat quiet.
indaba-zimbi lay on the ground like a person quite dead. his limbs had
all the utter relaxation of death. but as i watched i saw them begin
to stiffen, exactly as though _rigor mortis_ had set in. then, to my
astonishment, i perceived them once more relax, and this time there
appeared upon his chest the stain of decomposition. it spread and
spread; in three minutes the man, to all appearance, was a livid corpse.
i sat amazed watching this uncanny sight, and wondering if any further
natural process was about to be enacted. perhaps indaba-zimbi was
going to fall to dust before my eyes. as i watched i observed that
the discoloration was beginning to fade. first it vanished from the
extremities, then from the larger limbs, and lastly from the trunk.
then in turn came the third stage of relaxation, the second stage of
stiffness or _rigor_, and the first stage of after-death collapse. when
all these had rapidly succeeded each other, indaba-zimbi quietly woke
up.
i was too astonished to speak; i simply looked at him with my mouth
open.
"well, macumazahn," he said, putting his head on one side like a bird,
and nodding his white lock in a comical fashion, "it is all right; i
have seen her."
"seen who?" i said.
"the star, your wife, and the little maid. they are much frightened, but
unharmed. the babyan-frau watches them. she is mad, but the baboons obey
her, and do not hurt them. the star was sleeping from weariness, so i
whispered in her ear and told her not to be frightened, for you would
soon rescue her, and that meanwhile she must seem to be pleased to have
hendrika near her."
"you whispered in her ear?" i said. "how could you whisper in her ear?"
"bah! macumazahn. how could i seem to die and go rotten before your
eyes? you don't know, do you? well, i will tell you one thing. i had to
die to pass the doors of space, as you call them. i had to draw all the
healthy strength and life from my body in order to gather power to speak
with the star. it was a dangerous business, macumazahn, for if i had let
things go a little further they must have stopped so, and there would
have been an end of indaba-zimbi. ah, you white men, you know so much
that you think you know everything. but you don't! you are always
staring at the clouds and can't see the things that lie at your feet.
you hardly believe me now, do you, macumazahn? well, i will show you.
have you anything on you that the star has touched or worn?"
i thought for a moment, and said that i had a lock of her hair in my
pocket-book. he told me to give it him. i did so. going to the fire, he
lit the lock of hair in the flame, and let it burn to ashes, which he
caught in his left hand. these ashes he mixed up in a paste with the
juice of one of the leaves of the plant i have spoken of.
"now, macumazahn, shut your eyes," he said.
i did so, and he rubbed his paste on to my eyelids. at first it burnt
me, then my head swam strangely. presently this effect passed off, and
my brain was perfectly clear again, but i could not feel the ground with
my feet. indaba-zimbi led me to the side of the stream. beneath us was a
pool of beautifully clear water.
"look into the pool, macumazahn," said indaba-zimbi, and his voice
sounded hollow and far away in my ears.
i looked. the water grew dark; it cleared, and in it was a picture.
i saw a cave with a fire burning in it. against the wall of the cave
rested stella. her dress was torn almost off her, she looked dreadfully
pale and weary, and her eyelids were red as though with weeping. but she
slept, and i could almost think that i saw her lips shape my name in her
sleep. close to her, her head upon stella's breast, was little tota;
she had a skin thrown over her to keep out the night cold. the child was
awake, and appeared to be moaning with fear. by the fire, and in such a
position that the light fell full upon her face, and engaged in cooking
something in a rough pot shaped from wood, sat the baboon-woman,
hendrika. she was clothed in baboon skins, and her face had been
rubbed with some dark stain, which was, however, wearing off it. in
the intervals of her cooking she would turn on stella her wild eyes,
in which glared visible madness, with an expression of tenderness that
amounted to worship. then she would stare at the child and gnash her
teeth as though with hate. clearly she was jealous of it. round the
entrance arch of the cave peeped and peered the heads of many baboons.
presently hendrika made a sign to one of them; apparently she did not
speak, or rather grunt, in order not to wake stella. the brute hopped
forward, and she gave it a second rude wooden pot which was lying by
her. it took it and went. the last thing that i saw, as the vision
slowly vanished from the pool, was the dim shadow of the baboon
returning with the pot full of water.
presently everything had gone. i ceased to feel strange. there beneath
me was the pool, and at my side stood indaba-zimbi, smiling.
"you have seen things," he said.
"i have," i answered, and made no further remark on the matter. what was
there to say?[*] "do you know the path to the cave?" i added.
[*] for some almost equally remarkable instances of kaffir
magic the reader is referred to a work named "among the
zulus," by david leslie.--editor.
he nodded his head. "i did not follow it all just now, because it
winds," he said. "but i know it. we shall want the ropes."
"then let us be starting; the men have eaten."
he nodded his head again, and going to the men i told them to make
ready, adding that indaba-zimbi knew the way. they said that was all
right, if indaba-zimbi had "smelt her out," they should soon find the
star. so we started cheerfully enough, and my spirits were so much
improved that i was able to eat a boiled mealie cob or two as we walked.
we went up the valley, following the course of the stream for about a
mile; then indaba-zimbi made a sudden turn to the right, along another
kloof, of which there were countless numbers in the base of the great
hill.
on we went through kloof after kloof. indaba-zimbi, who led us, was
never at a loss, he turned up gulleys and struck across necks of hills
with the certainty of a hound on a hot scent. at length, after about
three hours' march, we came to a big silent valley on the northern slope
of the great peak. on one side of this valley was a series of stony
koppies, on the other rose a sheer wall of rock. we marched along
the wall for a distance of some two miles. then suddenly indaba-zimbi
halted.
"there is the place," he said, pointing to an opening in the cliff. this
opening was about forty feet from the ground, and ellipse-shaped.
it cannot have been more than twenty feet high by ten wide, and was
partially hidden by ferns and bushes that grew about it in the surface
of the cliff. keen as my eyes were, i doubt if i should ever have
noticed it, for there were many such cracks and crannies in the rocky
face of the great mountain.
we drew near and looked carefully at the place. the first thing i
noticed was that the rock, which was not quite perpendicular, had been
worn by the continual passage of baboons; the second, that something
white was hanging on a bush near the top of the ascent.
it was a pocket-handkerchief.
now there was no more doubt about the matter. with a beating heart i
began the ascent. for the first twenty feet it was comparatively easy,
for the rock shelved; the next ten feet was very difficult, but still
possible to an active man, and i achieved it, followed by indaba-zimbi.
but the last twelve or fifteen feet could only be scaled by throwing a
rope over the trunk of a stunted tree, which grew at the bottom of the
opening. this we accomplished with some trouble, and the rest was easy.
a foot or two above my head the handkerchief fluttered in the wind.
hanging to the rope, i grasped it. it was my wife's. as i did so i
noticed the face of a baboon peering at me over the edge of the cleft,
the first baboon we had seen that morning. the brute gave a bark and
vanished. thrusting the handkerchief into my breast, i set my feet
against the cliff and scrambled up as hard as i could go. i knew that
we had no time to lose, for the baboon would quickly alarm the others. i
gained the cleft. it was a mere arched passage cut by water, ending in
a gulley, which led to a wide open space of some sort. i looked through
the passage and saw that the gulley was black with baboons. on they came
by the hundred. i unslung my elephant gun from my shoulders and waited,
calling to the men below to come up with all possible speed. the brutes
streamed on down the gloomy gulf towards me, barking, grunting, and
showing their huge teeth. i waited till they were within fifteen yards.
then i fired the elephant gun, which was loaded with slugs, right into
the thick of them. in that narrow place the report echoed like a cannon
shot, but its sound was quickly swallowed in the volley of piercing
human-sounding groans and screams that followed. the charge of heavy
slugs had ploughed through the host of baboons, of which at least a
dozen lay dead or dying in the passage. for a moment they hesitated,
then they came on again with a hideous clamour. fortunately by this time
indaba-zimbi, who also had a gun, was standing by my side, otherwise i
should have been torn to pieces before i could re-load. he fired both
barrels into them, and again checked the rush. but they came on again,
and notwithstanding the appearance of two other natives with guns, which
they let off with more or less success, we should have been overwhelmed
by the great and ferocious apes had i not by this time succeeded in
re-loading the elephant gun. when they were right on us, i fired, with
even more deadly effect than before, for at that distance every slug
told on their long line. the howls and screams of pain and rage were
now something inconceivable. one might have thought that we were doing
battle with a host of demons; indeed in that light--for the overhanging
arch of rock made it very dark--the gnashing snouts and sombre glowing
eyes of the apes looked like those of devils as they are represented by
monkish fancy. but the last shot was too much for them; they withdrew,
dragging some of their wounded with them, and thus gave us time to get
our men up the cliff. in a few minutes all were there, and we advanced
down the passage, which presently opened into a rocky gulley with
shelving sides. this gulley had a water-way at the bottom of it; it was
about a hundred yards long, and the slopes on either side were topped
by precipitous cliffs. i looked at these slopes; they literally swarmed
with baboons, grunting, barking, screaming, and beating their breasts
with their long arms, in fury. i looked up the water-way; along it,
accompanied by a mob, or, as it were, a guard of baboons, ran hendrika,
her long hair flying, madness written on her face, and in her arms was
the senseless form of little tota.
she saw us, and a foam of rage burst from her lips. she screamed aloud.
to me the sound was a mere inarticulate cry, but the baboons clearly
understood it, for they began to roll rocks down on to us. one boulder
leaped past me and struck down a kaffir behind; another fell from the
roof of the arch on to a man's head and killed him. indaba-zimbi lifted
his gun to shoot hendrika; i knocked it up, so that the shot went over
her, crying that he would kill the child. then i shouted to the men
to open out and form a line from side to side of the shelving gulley.
furious at the loss of their two comrades, they obeyed me, and keeping
in the water-way myself, together with indaba-zimbi and the other guns,
i gave the word to charge.
then the real battle began. it is difficult to say who fought the most
fiercely, the natives or the baboons. the kaffirs charged along the
slopes, and as they came, encouraged by the screams of hendrika, who
rushed to and fro holding the wretched tota before her as a shield, the
apes bounded at them in fury. scores were killed by the assegais, and
many more fell beneath our gun-shots; but still they came on. nor did
we go scathless. occasionally a man would slip, or be pulled over in the
grip of a baboon. then the others would fling themselves upon him like
dogs on a rat, and worry him to death. we lost five men in this way, and
i myself received a bite through the fleshy part of the left arm, but
fortunately a native near me assegaied the animal before i was pulled
down.
at length, and all of a sudden, the baboons gave up. a panic seemed to
seize them. notwithstanding the cries of hendrika they thought no more
of fight, but only of escape; some even did not attempt to get away from
the assegais of the kaffirs, they simply hid their horrible faces in
their paws, and, moaning piteously, waited to be slain.
hendrika saw that the battle was lost. dropping the child from her arms,
she rushed straight at us, a very picture of horrible insanity. i lifted
my gun, but could not bear to shoot. after all she was but a mad thing,
half ape, half woman. so i sprang to one side, and she landed full on
indaba-zimbi, knocking him down. but she did not stay to do any more.
wailing terribly, she rushed down the gulley and through the arch,
followed by a few of the surviving baboons, and vanished from our sight.
chapter xiii
what happened to stella
the fight was over. in all we had lost seven men killed, and several
more severely bitten, while but few had escaped without some tokens
whereby he might remember what a baboon's teeth and claws are like. how
many of the brutes we killed i never knew, because we did not count, but
it was a vast number. i should think that the stock must have been low
about babyan's peak for many years afterwards. from that day to this,
however, i have always avoided baboons, feeling more afraid of them than
any beast that lives.
the path was clear, and we rushed forward along the water-course. but
first we picked up little tota. the child was not in a swoon, as i had
thought, but paralyzed by terror, so that she could scarcely speak.
otherwise she was unhurt, though it took her many a week to recover her
nerve. had she been older, and had she not remembered hendrika, i doubt
if she would have recovered it. she knew me again, and flung her little
arms about my neck, clinging to me so closely that i did not dare to
give her to any one else to carry lest i should add to her terrors. so i
went on with her in my arms. the fears that pierced my heart may well be
imagined. should i find stella living or dead? should i find her at all?
well, we should soon know now. we stumbled on up the stony watercourse;
notwithstanding the weight of tota i led the way, for suspense lent me
wings. now we were through, and an extraordinary scene lay before us. we
were in a great natural amphitheatre, only it was three times the size
of any amphitheatre ever shaped by man, and the walls were formed of
precipitous cliffs, ranging from one to two hundred feet in height.
for the rest, the space thus enclosed was level, studded with park-like
trees, brilliant with flowers, and having a stream running through
the centre of it, that, as i afterwards discovered, welled up from the
ground at the head of the open space.
we spread ourselves out in a line, searching everywhere, for tota was
too overcome to be able to tell us where stella was hidden away. for
nearly half an hour we searched and searched, scanning the walls of
rock for any possible openings to a cave. in vain, we could find none. i
applied to old indaba-zimbi, but his foresight was at fault here. all
he could say was that this was the place, and that the "star" was hidden
somewhere in a cave, but where the cave was he could not tell. at last
we came to the top of the amphitheatre. there before us was a wall of
rock, of which the lower parts were here and there clothed in grasses,
lichens, and creepers. i walked along it, calling at the top of my
voice.
presently my heart stood still, for i thought i heard a faint answer. i
drew nearer to the place from which the sound seemed to come, and again
called. yes, there was an answer in my wife's voice. it seemed to come
from the rock. i went up to it and searched among the creepers, but
still could find no opening.
"move the stone," cried stella's voice, "the cave is shut with a stone."
i took a spear and prodded at the cliff whence the sound came. suddenly
the spear sunk in through a mass of lichen. i swept the lichen aside,
revealing a boulder that had been rolled into the mouth of an opening in
the rock, which it fitted so accurately that, covered as it was by
the overhanging lichen, it might well have escaped the keenest eye. we
dragged the boulder out; it was two men's work to do it. beyond was
a narrow, water-worn passage, which i followed with a beating heart.
presently the passage opened into a small cave, shaped like a pickle
bottle, and coming to a neck at the top end. we passed through and found
ourselves in a second, much larger cave, that i at once recognized as
the one of which indaba-zimbi had shown me a vision in the water. light
reached it from above--how i know not--and by it i could see a form
half-sitting, half lying on some skins at the top end of the cave. i
rushed to it. it was stella! stella bound with strips of hide, bruised,
torn, but still stella, and alive.
she saw me, she gave one cry, then, as i caught her in my arms, she
fainted. it was happy indeed that she did not faint before, for had it
not been for the sound of her voice i do not believe we should ever have
found that cunningly hidden cave, unless, indeed, indaba-zimbi's magic
(on which be blessings) had come to our assistance.
we bore her to the open air, laid her beneath the shade of a tree, and
cut the bonds loose from her ankles. as we went i glanced at the cave.
it was exactly as i had seen it in the vision. there burnt the fire,
there were the rude wooden vessels, one of them still half full of the
water which i had seen the baboon bring. i felt awed as i looked, and
marvelled at the power wielded by a savage who could not even read and
write.
now i could see stella clearly. her face was scratched, and haggard
with fear and weeping, her clothes were almost torn off her, and her
beautiful hair was loose and tangled. i sent for water, and we sprinkled
her face. then i forced a little of the brandy which we distilled from
peaches at the kraals between her lips, and she opened her eyes, and
throwing her arms about me clung to me as little tota had done, sobbing,
"thank god! thank god!"
after a while she grew quieter, and i made her and tota eat some food
from the store that we had brought with us. i too ate and was thankful,
for with the exception of the mealie cobs i had tasted nothing for
nearly four-and-twenty hours. then she washed her face and hands, and
tidied her rags of dress as well as she was able. as she did so by
degrees i drew her story from her.
it seemed that on the previous afternoon, being wearied with packing,
she went out to visit her father's grave, taking tota with her, and was
followed there by the two dogs. she wished to lay some flowers on the
grave and take farewell of the dust it covered, for as we had expected
to trek early on the morrow she did not know if she would find a later
opportunity. they passed up the garden, and gathering some flowers from
the orange trees and elsewhere, went on to the little graveyard. here
she laid them on the grave as we had found them, and then sitting down,
fell into a deep and sad reverie, such as the occasion would naturally
induce. while she sat thus, tota, who was a lively child and active as
a kitten, strayed away without stella observing it. with her went the
dogs, who also had grown tired of inaction; a while passed, and suddenly
she heard the dogs barking furiously about a hundred and fifty yards
away. then she heard tota scream, and the dogs also yelling with fear
and pain. she rose and ran as swiftly as she could towards the spot
whence the sound came. presently she was there. before her in the
glade, holding the screaming tota in her arms, was a figure in which,
notwithstanding the rough disguise of baboon skins and colouring matter,
she had no difficulty in recognizing hendrika, and all about her were
numbers of baboons, rolling over and over in two hideous heaps, of which
the centres were the unfortunate dogs now in process of being rent to
fragments.
"hendrika," stella cried, "what does this mean? what are you doing with
tota and those brutes?"
the woman heard her and looked up. then stella saw that she was mad;
madness stared from her eyes. she dropped the child, which instantly
flew to stella for protection. stella clasped it, only to be herself
clasped by hendrika. she struggled fiercely, but it was of no use--the
babyan-frau had the strength of ten. she lifted her and tota as though
they were nothing, and ran off with them, following the bed of the
stream in order to avoid leaving a spoor. only the baboons who came with
her, minus the one the dogs had killed, would not take to the water, but
kept pace with them on the bank.
stella said that the night which followed was more like a hideous
nightmare than a reality. she was never able to tell me all that
occurred in it. she had a vague recollection of being borne over rocks
and along kloofs, while around her echoed the horrible grunts and clicks
of the baboons. she spoke to hendrika in english and kaffir, imploring
her to let them go; but the woman, if i may call her so, seemed in her
madness to have entirely forgotten these tongues. when stella spoke she
would kiss her and stroke her hair, but she did not seem to understand
what it was she said. on the other hand, she could, and did, talk to
the baboons, that seemed to obey her implicitly. moreover, she would not
allow them to touch either stella or the child in her arms. once one
of them tried to do so, and she seized a dead stick and struck it
so heavily on the head that it fell senseless. thrice stella made an
attempt to escape, for sometimes even hendrika's giant strength waned
and she had to set them down. but on each occasion she caught them, and
it was in these struggles that stella's clothes were so torn. at length
before daylight they reached the cliff, and with the first break of
light the ascent began. hendrika dragged them up the first stages, but
when they came to the precipitous place she tied the strips of hide,
of which she had a supply wound round her waist, beneath stella's arms.
steep as the place was the baboons ascended it easily enough, springing
from a knock of rock to the trunk of the tree that grew on the edge of
the crevasse. hendrika followed them, holding the end of the hide reim
in her teeth, one of the baboons hanging down from the tree to assist
her ascent. it was while she was ascending that stella bethought of
letting fall her handkerchief in the faint hope that some searcher might
see it.
by this time hendrika was on the tree, and grunting out orders to the
baboons which clustered about stella below. suddenly these seized her
and little tota who was in her arms, and lifted her from the ground.
then hendrika above, aided by other baboons, put out all her great
strength and pulled the two of them up the rock. twice stella swung
heavily against the cliff. after the second blow she felt her senses
going, and was consumed with terror lest she should drop tota. but she
managed to cling to her, and together they reached the cleft.
"from that time," stella went on, "i remember no more till i woke to
find myself in a gloomy cave resting on a bed of skins. my legs were
bound, and hendrika sat near me watching me, while round the edge of the
cave peered the heads of those horrible baboons. tota was still in my
arms, and half dead from terror; her moans were pitiful to hear. i spoke
to hendrika, imploring her to release us; but either she has lost all
understanding of human speech, or she pretends to have done so. all
she would do was to caress me, and even kiss my hands and dress with
extravagant signs of affection. as she did so, tota shrunk closer to me.
this hendrika saw and glared so savagely at the child that i feared lest
she was going to kill her. i diverted her attention by making signs that
i wanted water, and this she gave me in a wooden bowl. as you saw, the
cave was evidently hendrika's dwelling-place. there are stores of fruit
in it and some strips of dried flesh. she gave me some of the fruit and
tota a little, and i made tota eat some. you can never know what i went
through, allan. i saw now that hendrika was quite mad, and but little
removed from the brutes to which she is akin, and over which she has
such unholy power. the only trace of humanity left about her was her
affection for me. evidently her idea was to keep me here with her, to
keep me away from you, and to carry out this idea she was capable of the
exercise of every artifice and cunning. in this way she was sane enough,
but in every other way she was mad. moreover, she had not forgotten her
horrible jealousy. already i saw her glaring at tota, and knew that the
child's murder was only a matter of time. probably within a few hours
she would be killed before my eyes. of escape, even if i had the
strength, there was absolutely no chance, and little enough of our ever
being found. no, we should be kept here guarded by a mad thing, half
ape, half woman, till we perished miserably. then i thought of you,
dear, and of all that you must be suffering, and my heart nearly broke.
i could only pray to god that i might either be rescued or die swiftly.
"as i prayed i dropped into a kind of doze from utter weariness, and
then i had the strangest dream. i dreamed that indaba-zimbi stood over
me nodding his white lock, and spoke to me in kaffir, telling me not to
be frightened, for you would soon be with me, and that meanwhile i must
humour hendrika, pretending to be pleased to have her near me. the dream
was so vivid that i actually seemed to see and hear him, as i see and
hear him now."
here i looked up and glanced at old indaba-zimbi, who was sitting near.
but it was not till afterwards that i told stella of how her vision was
brought about.
"at any rate," she went on, "when i awoke i determined to act on my
dream. i took hendrika's hand, and pressed it. she actually laughed in a
wild kind of way with happiness, and laid her head upon my knee. then i
made signs that i wanted food, and she threw wood on the fire, which i
forgot to tell you was burning in the cave, and began to make some of
the broth that she used to cook very well, and she did not seem to
have forgotten all about it. at any rate the broth was not bad, though
neither tota nor i could drink much of it. fright and weariness had
taken away our appetites.
"after the meal was done--and i prolonged it as much as possible--i saw
hendrika was beginning to get jealous of tota again. she glared at her
and then at the big knife which was tied round her own body. i knew
the knife again, it was the one with which she had tried to murder you,
dear. at last she went so far as to draw the knife. i was paralyzed with
fear, then suddenly i remembered that when she was our servant, and used
to get out of temper and sulk, i could always calm her by singing to
her. so i began to sing hymns. instantly she forgot her jealousy and put
the knife back into its sheath. she knew the sound of the singing, and
sat listening to it with a rapt face; the baboons, too, crowded in at
the entrance of the cave to listen. i must have sung for an hour or
more, all the hymns that i could remember. it was so very strange
and dreadful sitting there singing to mad hendrika and those hideous
man-like apes that shut their eyes and nodded their great heads as i
sang. it was a horrible nightmare; but i believe that the baboons are
almost as human as the bushmen.
"well, this went on for a long time till my voice was getting exhausted.
then suddenly i heard the baboons outside raise a loud noise, as they do
when they are angry. then, dear, i heard the boom of your elephant
gun, and i think it was the sweetest sound that ever came to my ears.
hendrika heard it too. she sprang up, stood for a moment, then, to my
horror, swept tota into her arms and rushed down the cave. of course
i could not stir to follow her, for my feet were tied. next instant i
heard the sound of a rock being moved, and presently the lessening of
the light in the cave told me that i was shut in. now the sound even
of the elephant gun only reached me very faintly, and presently i could
hear nothing more, straining my ears as i would.
"at last i heard a faint shouting that reached me through the wall of
rock. i answered as loud as i could. you know the rest; and oh, my dear
husband, thank god! thank god!" and she fell weeping into my arms.
chapter xiv
fifteen years after
both stella and tota were too weary to be moved, so we camped that night
in the baboons' home, but were troubled by no baboons. stella would not
sleep in the cave; she said the place terrified her, so i made her up a
kind of bed under a thorn-tree. as this rock-bound valley was one of the
hottest places i ever was in, i thought that this would not matter; but
when at sunrise on the following morning i saw a veil of miasmatic mist
hanging over the surface of the ground, i changed my opinion. however,
neither stella nor tota seemed the worse, so as soon as was practical
we started homewards. i had already on the previous day sent some of the
men back to the kraals to fetch a ladder, and when we reached the cliff
we found them waiting for us beneath. with the help of the ladder the
descent was easy. stella simply got out of her rough litter at the top
of the cliff, for we found it necessary to carry her, climbed down the
ladder, and got into it again at the bottom.
well, we reached the kraals safely enough, seeing nothing more of
hendrika, and, were this a story, doubtless i should end it here
with--"and lived happily ever after." but alas! it is not so. how am i
to write it?
my dearest wife's vital energy seemed completely to fail her now that
the danger was past, and within twelve hours of our return i saw that
her state was such as to necessitate the abandonment of any idea of
leaving babyan kraals at present. the bodily exertion, the anguish of
mind, and the terror which she had endured during that dreadful night,
combined with her delicate state of health, had completely broken her
down. to make matters worse, also, she was taken with an attack of
fever, contracted no doubt in the unhealthy atmosphere of that accursed
valley. in time she shook the fever off, but it left her dreadfully
weak, and quite unfit to face the trial before her.
i think she knew that she was going to die; she always spoke of my
future, never of _our_ future. it is impossible for me to tell how sweet
she was; how gentle, how patient and resigned. nor, indeed, do i wish
to tell it, it is too sad. but this i will say, i believe that if ever
a woman drew near to perfection while yet living on the earth, stella
quatermain did so.
the fatal hour drew on. my boy harry was born, and his mother lived
to kiss and bless him. then she sank. we did what we could, but we had
little skill, and might not hold her back from death. all through one
weary night i watched her with a breaking heart.
the dawn came, the sun rose in the east. his rays falling on the peak
behind were reflected in glory upon the bosom of the western sky. stella
awoke from her swoon and saw the light. she whispered to me to open the
door of the hut. i did so, and she fixed her dying eyes on the splendour
of the morning sky. she looked on me and smiled as an angel might
smile. then with a last effort she lifted her hand, and, pointing to the
radiant heavens, whispered:
"_there, allan, there!_"
it was done, and i was broken-hearted, and broken-hearted i must wander
to the end. those who have endured my loss will know my sorrow; it
cannot be written. in such peace and at such an hour may i also die!
yes, it is a sad story, but wander where we will about the world we can
never go beyond the sound of the passing bell. for me, as for my father
before me, and for the millions who have been and who shall be, there is
but one word of comfort. "the lord hath given, and the lord hath taken
away." let us, then, bow our heads in hope, and add with a humble heart,
"blessed be the name of the lord."
i buried her by her father's side, and the weeping of the people who had
loved her went up to heaven. even indaba-zimbi wept, but i could weep no
more.
on the second night from her burial i could not sleep. i rose, dressed
myself, and went out into the night. the moon was shining brightly,
and by its rays i shaped my course towards the graveyard. i drew near
silently, and as i came i thought that i heard a sound of moaning on the
further side of the wall. i looked over it. crouched by stella's grave,
and tearing at its sods with her hands, as though she would unearth that
which lay within, was _hendrika_. her face was wild and haggard, her
form was so emaciated that when the pelts she wore slipped aside, the
shoulder-blades seemed to project almost through her skin. suddenly she
looked up and saw me. laughing a dreadful maniac laugh, she put her hand
to her girdle and drew her great knife from it. i thought that she was
about to attack me, and prepared to defend myself as i best could, for i
was unarmed. but she made no effort to do so. lifting the knife on high,
for a moment she held it glittering in the moonlight, then plunged it
into her own breast, and fell headlong to the ground.
i sprang over the wall and ran to her. she was not yet dead. presently
she opened her eyes, and i saw that the madness had gone out of them.
"macumazahn," she said, speaking in english and in an thick difficult
voice like one who half forgot and half remembered--"macumazahn, i
remember now. i have been mad. is she really dead, macumazahn?"
"yes," i said, "she is dead, and you killed her."
"i killed her!" the dying woman faltered, "and i loved her. yes, yes, i
know now. i became a brute again and dragged her to the brutes, and now
once more i am a woman, and she is dead, and i killed her--because i
loved her so. i killed her who saved me from the brutes. i am not dead
yet, macumazahn. take me and torture me to death, slowly, very slowly.
it was jealousy of you that drove me mad, and i have killed her, and now
she never can forgive me."
"ask forgiveness from above," i said, for hendrika had been a christian,
and the torment of her remorse touched me.
"i ask no forgiveness," she said. "may god torture me for ever, because
i killed her; may i become a brute for ever till she comes to find me
and forgives me! i only want her forgiveness." and wailing in an anguish
of the heart so strong that her bodily suffering seemed to be forgotten,
hendrika, the baboon-woman, died.
i went back to the kraals, and, waking indaba-zimbi, told him what had
happened, asking him to send some one to watch the body, as i proposed
to give it burial. but next morning it was gone, and i found that the
natives, hearing of the event, had taken the corpse and thrown it to the
vultures with every mark of hate. such, then, was the end of hendrika.
a week after hendrika's death i left babyan kraals. the place was
hateful to me now; it was a haunted place. i sent for old indaba-zimbi
and told him that i was going. he answered that it was well. "the place
has served your turn," he said; "here you have won that joy which it was
fated you should win, and have suffered those things that it was fated
you should suffer. yes, and though you know it not now, the joy and the
suffering, like the sunshine and the storm, are the same thing, and will
rest at last in the same heaven, the heaven from which they came. now
go, macumazahn."
i asked him if he was coming with me.
"no," he answered, "our paths lie apart henceforth, macumazahn. we met
together for certain ends. those ends are fulfilled. now each one goes
his own way. you have still many years before you, macumazahn; my years
are few. when we shake hands here it will be for the last time. perhaps
we may meet again, but it will not be in this world. henceforth we have
each of us a friend the less."
"heavy words," i said.
"true words," he answered.
well, i have little heart to write the rest of it. i went, leaving
indaba-zimbi in charge of the place, and making him a present of such
cattle and goods as i did not want.
tota, i of course took with me. fortunately by this time she had almost
recovered the shock to her nerves. the baby harry, as he was afterwards
named, was a fine healthy child, and i was lucky in getting a
respectable native woman, whose husband had been killed in the fight
with the baboons, to accompany me as his nurse.
slowly, and followed for a distance by all the people, i trekked away
from babyan kraals. my route towards natal was along the edge of the
bad lands, and my first night's outspan was beneath that very tree where
stella, my lost wife, had found us as we lay dying of thirst.
i did not sleep much that night. and yet i was glad that i had not died
in the desert about eleven months before. i felt then, as from year
to year i have continued to feel while i wander through the lonely
wilderness of life, that i had been preserved to an end. i had won my
darling's love, and for a little while we had been happy together. our
happiness was too perfect to endure. she is lost to me now, but she is
lost to be found again.
here on the following morning i bade farewell to indaba-zimbi.
"good-bye, macumazahn," he said, nodding his white lock at me. "good-bye
for a while. i am not a christian; your father could not make me that.
but he was a wise man, and when he said that those who loved each other
shall meet again, he did not lie. and i too am a wise man in my way,
macumazahn, and i say it is true that we shall meet again. all my
prophecies to you have come true, macumazahn, and this one shall come
true also. i tell you that you shall return to babyan kraals and shall
not find me. i tell you that you shall journey to a further land than
babyan kraals and shall find me. farewell!" and he took a pinch of
snuff, turned, and went.
of my journey down to natal there is little to tell. i met with many
adventures, but they were of an every-day kind, and in the end arrived
safely at port durban, which i now visited for the first time. both tota
and my baby boy bore the journey well. and here i may as well chronicle
the destiny of tota. for a year she remained under my charge. then she
was adopted by a lady, the wife of an english colonel, who was stationed
at the cape. she was taken by her adopted parents to england, where
she grew up a very charming and pretty girl, and ultimately married a
clergyman in norfolk. but i never saw her again, though we often wrote
to each other.
before i returned to the country of my birth, she too had been gathered
to the land of shadows, leaving three children behind her. ah me! all
this took place so long ago, when i was young who now am old.
perhaps it may interest the reader to know the fate of mr. carson's
property, which should of course have gone to his grandson harry. i
wrote to england to claim the estate on his behalf, but the lawyer
to whom the matter was submitted said that my marriage to stella, not
having been celebrated by an ordained priest, was not legal according to
english law, and therefore harry could not inherit. foolishly enough
i acquiesced in this, and the property passed to a cousin of my
father-in-law's; but since i have come to live in england i have been
informed that this opinion is open to great suspicion, and that there
is every probability that the courts would have declared the marriage
perfectly binding as having been solemnly entered into in accordance
with the custom of the place where it was contracted. but i am now so
rich that it is not worth while to move in the matter. the cousin is
dead, his son is in possession, so let him keep it.
once, and once only, did i revisit babyan kraals. some fifteen years
after my darling's death, when i was a man in middle life, i undertook
an expedition to the zambesi, and one night outspanned at the mouth of
the well-known valley beneath the shadow of the great peak. i mounted
my horse, and, quite alone, rode up the valley, noticing with a strange
prescience of evil that the road was overgrown, and, save for the music
of the waterfalls, the place silent as death. the kraals that used to be
to the left of the road by the river had vanished. i rode towards their
site; the mealie fields were choked with weeds, the paths were dumb with
grass. presently i reached the place. there, overgrown with grass, were
the burnt ashes of the kraals, and there among the ashes, gleaming in
the moonlight, lay the white bones of men. now it was clear to me. the
settlement had been fallen on by some powerful foe, and its inhabitants
put to the assegai. the forebodings of the natives had come true; babyan
kraals were peopled by memories alone.
i passed on up the terraces. there shone the roofs of the marble huts.
they would not burn, and were too strong to be easily pulled down. i
entered one of them--it had been our sleeping hut--and lit a candle
which i had with me. the huts had been sacked; leaves of books and
broken mouldering fragments of the familiar furniture lay about. then
i remembered that there was a secret place hollowed in the floor and
concealed by a stone, where stella used to hide her little treasures. i
went to the stone and dragged it up. there was something within wrapped
in rotting native cloth. i undid it. it was the dress my wife had been
married in. in the centre of the dress were the withered wreath and
flowers she had worn, and with them a little paper packet. i opened it;
it contained a lock of my own hair!
i remembered then that i had searched for this dress when i came away
and could not find it, for i had forgotten the secret recess in the
floor.
taking the dress with me, i left the hut for the last time. leaving
my horse tied to a tree, i walked to the graveyard, through the ruined
garden. there it was a mass of weeds, but over my darling's grave grew a
self-sown orange bush, of which the scented petals fell in showers on to
the mound beneath. as i drew near, there was a crash and a rush. a great
baboon leapt from the centre of the graveyard and vanished into the
trees. i could almost believe that it was the wraith of hendrika doomed
to keep an eternal watch over the bones of the woman her jealous rage
had done to death.
i tarried there a while, filled with such thoughts as may not be
written. then, leaving my dead wife to her long sleep where the waters
fall in melancholy music beneath the shadow of the everlasting mountain,
i turned and sought that spot where first we had told our love. now the
orange grove was nothing but a tangled thicket; many of the trees were
dead, choked with creepers, but some still flourished. there stood the
one beneath which we had lingered, there was the rock that had been our
seat, and there on the rock sat the wraith of _stella_, the stella whom
i had wed! ay! there she sat, and on her upturned face was that same
spiritual look which i saw upon it in the hour when we first had kissed.
the moonlight shone in her dark eyes, the breeze wavered in her curling
hair, her breast rose and fell, a gentle smile played about her
parted lips. i stood transfixed with awe and joy, gazing on that lost
loveliness which once was mine. i could not speak, and she spoke no
word; she did not even seem to see me. now her eyes fell. for a moment
they met mine, and their message entered into me.
then she was gone. she was gone; nothing was left but the tremulous
moonlight falling where she had been, the melancholy music of the
waters, the shadow of the everlasting mountain, and, in my heart, the
sorrow and the hope.
end of the project gutenberg ebook of allan's wife, by h. rider haggard
*** end of this project gutenberg ebook allan's wife ***
***** this file should be named 2727.txt or 2727.zip *****
this and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/2/2727/
produced by john bickers; dagny; david widger
updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.
creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  special rules,
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark.  project
gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission.  if you
do not charge anything for copies of this ebook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  they may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically anything with public domain ebooks.  redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.
*** start: full license ***
the full project gutenberg license
please read this before you distribute or use this work
to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "project
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project
gutenberg-tm license (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).
section 1.  general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg-tm
electronic works
1.a.  by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8.
1.b.  "project gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  see
paragraph 1.c below.  there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  see paragraph 1.e below.
1.c.  the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation"
or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of project
gutenberg-tm electronic works.  nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the united states.  if an
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to project gutenberg
are removed.  of course, we hope that you will support the project
gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full project
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others.
1.d.  the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  if you are outside the united states, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other project
gutenberg-tm work.  the foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united
states.
1.e.  unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:
1.e.1.  the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  you may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org
1.e.2.  if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the united states without paying any fees
or charges.  if you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or
1.e.9.
1.e.3.  if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  additional terms will be linked
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
1.e.4.  do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg-tm.
1.e.5.  do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg-tm license.
1.e.6.  you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  however, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other
form.  any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm
license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.
1.e.7.  do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.
1.e.8.  you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that
- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  the fee is
owed to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
project gutenberg literary archive foundation.  royalty payments
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
returns.  royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the
address specified in section 4, "information about donations to
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation."
- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm
license.  you must require such a user to return or
destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
project gutenberg-tm works.
- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
of receipt of the work.
- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of project gutenberg-tm works.
1.e.9.  if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark.  contact the
foundation as set forth in section 3 below.
1.f.
1.f.1.  project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the project gutenberg-tm
collection.  despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.
1.f.2.  limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right
of replacement or refund" described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
provided in paragraph f3.  you agree that the foundation, the
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
damage.
1.f.3.  limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  if you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  the person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  if you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  if the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.
1.f.4.  except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is' with no other
warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to
warranties of merchantibility or fitness for any purpose.
1.f.5.  some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  the invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
1.f.6.  indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
providing copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause.
section  2.  information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm
project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  it exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.
volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching project gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  in 2001, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations.
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see sections 3 and 4
and the foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.
section 3.  information about the project gutenberg literary archive
foundation
the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
revenue service.  the foundation's ein or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  contributions to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by u.s. federal laws and your state's laws.
the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s.
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  its business office is located at
809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org
for additional contact information:
dr. gregory b. newby
chief executive and director
gbnewby@pglaf.org
section 4.  information about donations to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation
project gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the irs.
the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
states.  compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  we do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  to
send donations or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org
while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.
international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the united states.  u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.
please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
to donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate
section 5.  general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic
works.
professor michael s. hart is the originator of the project gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  for thirty years, he produced and distributed project
gutenberg-tm ebooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.
project gutenberg-tm ebooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s.
unless a copyright notice is included.  thus, we do not necessarily
keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility:
http://www.gutenberg.org
this web site includes information about project gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.
