that? oh, that's a perspective machine. well, not exactly, but that's
what i call it. no, i don't know how it works. too complicated for me.
carter could make it go, but after he made it he never used it. too bad;
he thought he'd make a lot of money with it there for awhile, while he
was working it out. almost had me convinced, but i told him, "get it to
working first, carter, and then show me what you can do with it better
than i can do without it. i'm doing pretty well as is ... pictures
selling good, even if i do make 'em all by guesswork, as you call it."
that's what i told him.
y'see, carter was one a them artists that think they can work everything
out by formulas and stuff. me, i just paint things as i see 'em. never
worry about perspective and all that kinda mechanical aids. never even
went to art school. but i do all right. carter, now, was a different
sorta artist. well, he wasn't really an artist--more of a draftsman.
i first got him in to help me with a series of real estate paintings i'd
got an order for. big aerial views of land developments, and drawings of
buildings, roads and causeways, that kinda stuff. was a little too much
for me to handle alone, 'cause i never studied that kinda things, ya
know. i thought he'd do the mechanical drawings, which shoulda been
simple for anybody trained that way, and i'd throw in the colors,
figures and trees and so on. he did fine. job came out good; client was
real happy. we made a pretty good amount on the job, enough to keep us
for a coupla months without working afterwards. i took it easy, fishing
and so on, but carter stayed here in the studio working on his own
stuff. i let him keep an eye on things for me around the place, and just
dropped in now and then to check up.
the guy was nuts on the subject of perspective. i thought he knew all
there was to know about it already, but he claimed _nobody_ knew
anything about it, really. said he'd been studying it for years, and the
more he learned about it the more there was to learn. he used to cover
big sheets of paper with complicated diagrams trying to prove something
or other to himself. i'd come into the studio and find him with thumb
tacks and strings and stuff all over the place. he'd get big long rulers
and draw lines to various points all over the room, and end up with a
little drawing of a cube about an inch square that anybody coulda made
in a half a minute without all the apparatus. seemed pretty silly to me.
then he brought in some books on mathematics and physics and other
things, and a bunch of slide rules, calculators, and junk. he musta been
a pretty smart guy to know how to handle all those things, even if he
was kinda dopey about other things. you know ... women and fishing and
sports and drinking; he was lousy at everything except working those
perspective problems. personally, i couldn't see much sense to what he
was doing. the guy could draw all right already, so i asked him what
more did he want? lemme see if i can remember what he said.
"i'm trying to get at things as they really are, not as they appear," he
said. i think those were his words. "art is an illusion, a bag of
tricks. reality is something else, not what we _think_ it is. drawings
are two-dimensional projections of a world that is not merely three- but
four-dimensional, if not more," he said.
*       *       *       *       *
yeh, kind of a crackpot, carter was. just on that one subject, though;
nice enough guy otherwise. here, look at some of the drawings he made,
working out his formulas. nice designs, huh? might make good wall paper
or fabric patterns. real abstract ... that's what people seem to like.
see all those little letters scattered around among the lines? different
kinds of vanishing points, they are. carter claimed the whole world was
full of vanishing points. you don't know what a vanishing point is?
lemme see if i can explain. come over to the window here.
ya see how that road out there gets smaller and smaller in the distance?
of course the road doesn't really get smaller--it just looks that way.
that's what we call a vanishing point in drawing. simple, isn't it?
never could understand why carter went to so much trouble working out
all those ways to locate vanishing points. me, i just throw 'em in
wherever i need 'em. but carter claimed that was wrong. said they were
all connected together some way, and he was gonna work out a method to
prove it.
here ... here's a little gadget he made up to help his calculations.
bunch of disks all pivoted together at the center; you're supposed to
turn 'em around so the arrows point to the different figures and things.
here's the square root sign, i remember carter telling me that. this one
is the tangent function, whatever that means. log, there, is short for
logarithm. oh, he had a bunch of that scientific stuff in his head all
the time; dunno whether he understood it all himself. he built this
thing just before he put together the perspective machine there.
silly-looking gadget, huh? all them pipes and wires and that little cube
in the center ... don't try to touch it, it ain't really there. you just
think it is. it's what carter called a teteract, or a cataract ... no,
that ain't the right word. somepin' like that--tesser something or
other. there's a picture like it in one of carter's books. hurts your
eyes to look at it, don't it?
that's what carter thought was going to make him a lot of fame and
money, that perspective machine. i told him nobody'd ever made a drawing
machine yet that worked, but he said it wasn't supposed to make
drawings. it was just supposed to give people a view of what reality
really is, instead of what they think it is. i dunno whether he expected
to charge money to look through it, or whether he was gonna look through
it himself and make some new kinda drawings and sell 'em.
no, i can't tell you how it works--i said before i don't know. carter
only used it once himself. i came in here the day he finished it, just
as he was ready to turn it on. he was just putting the finishing touches
on it.
"in a few minutes," he told me, "i'll have the answer to a question that
may never have been answered before: what is reality? is the world a
thing by itself, and all we know illusion? why do things grow smaller
the farther away from us they appear? why can't we see more than one
side of anything at a time? what happens to the far side of an object;
does it cease to exist just because we can't see it? are objects not
present nonexistent? because artists draw things vanishing to points,
does that mean that they really vanish?"
*       *       *       *       *
a wack, that's what he was. nice guy, but sorta screwy. he kept saying
more goofy things while he was finishing up the machine, about how he'd
figured out that all we knew about vision and drawing and so on must be
wrong, and that once he got a look at the real world he'd prove it.
"how about cameras?" i asked him. "take a picture with a camera and it
looks just about the same as a drawing, don't it?"
"that's because cameras are built to take pictures like we're used to
seeing them," he said. "flat, two-dimensional slices of reality, without
depth or motion."
"even 3-d moving pictures?" i asked.
"they're closer to reality," he admitted. "but they are still only cross
sections of it. the shutter of a movie camera is closed as much of the
time as it is open. what happens in between the times it's open?
"you know," he went on, "people used to think matter and motion were
continuous, but scientists have proved that they are discontinuous. now
some of them think time may be, too. maybe everything is just imaginary,
and appears to our senses in whatever way we want it to appear. we are
so well-trained that we see everything just as we are taught to see it
by generations of artists, writers, and other symbol-makers. if we could
see things as they really are, what might happen?"
"we'd probably all go nuts!" i told him. he just smiled.
"well, here goes," he said. "it's finished. now to find out who is
right, the scientists and philosophers who say reality is forever
unreachable, or the artists who say there isn't any reality--that we
make the whole thing up to suit ourselves."
he moved one of those pointers you see there, and squinted around at the
different scales and dials, and then stepped back. that little
tessy-thing appeared, real small at first. just a point; you could
hardly see it. i couldn't see anything else happening, and thought he
was gonna do somepin' else to the machine. i turned to look at carter,
and saw his face was white as a sheet.
"good gawd!" he says, just like that: "good gawd!" that's all.
"well," i says to him, "who was right, the scientists or the artists?"
"the artists!" he sorta screeches. "the artists were right all the time
... there _is_ no reality! it's all a fabric of illusion we've created
ourselves! and now i've ripped a hole in that!"
he gives a strangled hoot and goes hightailin' outta here like somepin'
was after him. jumps in his car and roars off down the road and
disappears.
naw, i don't mean he really disappeared--are you nuts? just roared on
down the road till he got so small i couldn't see him no more. you
know--the way things do when they go farther and farther away. happens
every day; that's what us artists mean by perspective.
the machine? well, i dunno what to do with it. if carter ever comes back
he might not like my getting rid of it. i was thinking mebbe i'd put it
in the hobby show at the county fair next week, though. ya notice how
that funny-looking cube inside there gets bigger every time you look at
it? there ... it just doubled its size again, see? people at the fair
oughtta get a big kick outta that. no telling how big it'll get with all
those people looking at it.
but come on, let's go fishing. we'd better hurry or it'll be too late.
the end
transcriber's note:
this etext was produced from _astounding science fiction_ july 1959.
extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the u.s.
copyright on this publication was renewed. minor spelling and
typographical errors have been corrected without note. informal
spellings have been retained.
