crane didn't get the nice man's name--until it
was far too late to do anything at all about it.
jack crane lay all morning in the vacant lot. now and then he moved a
little to quiet the protest of cramped muscles and stagnant blood, but
most of the time he was as motionless as the heap of rags he resembled.
not once did he hear or see a bohas agent, or, for that matter, anyone.
the predawn darkness had hidden his panting flight from the transie
jungle, his dodging across backyards while whistles shrilled and voices
shouted, and his crawling on hands and knees down an alley into the high
grass and bushes which fringed a hidden garden.
for a while his heart had knocked so loudly that he had been sure he
would not be able to hear his pursuers if they did get close. it seemed
inevitable that they would track him down. a buddy had told him that a
new camp had just been built at a place only three hours drive away from
the town. this meant that bohas would be thick as hornets in the
neighborhood. but no black uniforms had so far appeared. and then, lying
there while the passionate and untiring sun mounted the sky, the
bang-bang of his heart was replaced by a noiseless but painful movement
in his stomach.
he munched a candy bar and two dried rolls which a housewife had given
him the evening before. the tiger in his belly quit pacing back and
forth; it crouched and licked its chops, but its tail was stuck up in
his throat. jack could feel the dry fur swabbing his pharynx and mouth.
he suffered, but he was used to that. night would come as surely as
anything did. he'd get a drink then to quench his thirst.
boredom began to sit on his eyelids. just as he was about to accept some
much needed sleep, he moved a leaf with an accidental jerk of his hand
and uncovered a caterpillar. it was dark except for a row of yellow
spots along the central line of some of its segments. as soon as it was
exposed, it began slowly shimmying away. before it had gone two feet, it
was crossed by a moving shadow. guiding the shadow was a black wasp with
an orange ring around the abdomen. it closed the gap between itself and
the worm with a swift, smooth movement and straddled the dark body.
before the wasp could grasp the thick neck with its mandibles, the
intended victim began rapidly rolling and unrolling and flinging itself
from side to side. for a minute the delicate dancer above it could not
succeed in clenching the neck. its sharp jaws slid off the frenziedly
jerking skin until the tiring creature paused for the chip of a second.
seizing opportunity and larva at the same time, the wasp stood high on
its legs and pulled the worm's front end from the ground, exposing the
yellowed band of the underpart. the attacker's abdomen curved beneath
its own body; the stinger jabbed between two segments of the prey's
jointed length. instantly, the writhing stilled. a shudder, and the
caterpillar became as inert as if it were dead.
jack had watched with an eye not completely clinical, feeling the
sympathy of the hunted and the hounded for a fellow. his own struggles
of the past few months had been as desperate, though not as hopeless,
and ...
he stopped thinking. his heart again took up the rib-thudding. out of
the corner of his left eye he had seen a shadow that fell across the
garden. when he slowly turned his head to follow the stain upon the
sun-splashed soil, he saw that it clung to a pair of shining black
boots.
jack did not say anything. what was the use? he put his hands against
the weeds and pushed his body up. he looked into the silent mouth of a
.38 automatic. it told him his running days were over. you didn't talk
back to a mouth like that.
ii
jack was lucky. as one of the last to be herded into the truck, which
had been once used for hauling cattle, he had more room to breathe than
most of the others. he faced the rear bars. the vehicle was heading into
the sun. its rays were not as hard on him as on some of those who were
so jam-packed they could not turn to get the hot yellow splotch out of
their eyes.
he looked through lowered lids at the youths on either side of him. for
the last three days in the transie jungle, the one standing on his left
had given signs of what was coming upon him, what had come upon so many
of the transies. the muttering, the indifference to food, not hearing
you when you talked to him. and now the shock of being caught in the
raid had speeded up what everybody had foreseen. he was hardened, like a
concrete statue, into a half-crouch. his arms were held in front of him
like a praying mantis', and his hands clutched a bar. not even the
pressure of the crowd could break his posture.
the man on jack's right murmured something, but the roaring of motor and
clashing of gears shifting on a hill squashed his voice. he spoke
louder:
"_cerea flexibilitas_. extreme catatonic state. the fate of all of us."
"you're nuts," said jack. "not me. i'm no schizo, and i'm not going to
become one."
as there was no reply, jack decided he had not moved his lips enough to
be heard clearly. lately, even when it was quiet, people seemed to have
trouble making out what he was saying. it made him mildly angry.
he shouted. it did not matter if he were overheard. that any of the
prisoners were agents of the bureau of health and sanity didn't seem
likely. anyway, he didn't care. they wouldn't do anything to him they
hadn't planned before this.
"got any idea where we're going?"
"sure. f.m.r.c. 3. federal male rehabilitation camp no. 3. i spent two
weeks in the hills spying on it."
jack looked the speaker over. like all those in the truck, he wore a
frayed shirt, a stained and torn coat, and greasy, dirty trousers. the
black bristles on his face were long; the back of his neck was covered
by thick curls. the brim of his dusty hat was pulled down low. beneath
its shadow his eyes roamed from side to side with the same fear that
jack knew was in his own eyes.
hunger and sleepless nights had knobbed his cheekbones and honed his
chin to a sharp point. an almost visible air clung to him, a hot aura
that seemed to result from veins full of lava and eyeballs spilling out
a heat that could not be held within him. he had the face every transie
had, the face of a man who was either burning with fever or who had seen
a vision.
jack looked away to stare miserably at the dust boiling up behind the
wheels, as if he could see projected against its yellow-brown screen his
retreating past.
he spoke out of the side of his mouth. "what's happened to us? we should
be happy and working at good jobs and sure about the future. we
shouldn't be just bums, hobos, walkers of the streets, rod-hoppers,
beggars, and thieves."
his friend shrugged and looked uneasily from the corners of his eyes. he
was probably expecting the question they all asked sooner or later: _why
are_ you _on the road?_ they asked, but none replied with words that
meant anything. they lied, and they didn't seem to take any pleasure in
their lying. when they asked questions themselves, they knew they
wouldn't get the truth. but something forced them to keep on trying
anyway.
jack's buddy evaded also. he said, "i read a magazine article by a dr.
vespa, the head of the bureau of health and sanity. he'd written the
article just after the president created the bureau. he viewed, quote,
with alarm and apprehension, unquote, the fact that six percent of those
between the ages of twelve and twenty-five were schizophrenics who
needed institutionalizing. and he was, quote, appalled and horrified,
unquote, that five percent of the nation were homeless unemployed and
that three point seven percent of those were between the ages of
fourteen and thirty. he said that if this schizophrenia kept on
progressing, half the world would be in rehabilitation camps. but if
that occurred, the sane half would go to pot. back to the stone age. and
the schizos would die."
*       *       *       *       *
he licked his lips as if he were tasting the figures and found them
bitter.
"i was very interested by vespa's reply to a mother who had written
him," he went on. "her daughter ended up in a bohas camp for schizos,
and her son had left his wonderful home and brilliant future to become a
bum. she wanted to know why. vespa took six long paragraphs to give six
explanations, all equally valid and all advanced by equally
distinguished sociologists. he himself favored the mass hysteria theory.
but if you looked at his gobbledegook closely, you could reduce it to
one phrase, _we don't know_.
"he did say this--though you won't like it--that the schizos and the
transies were just two sides of the same coin. both were infected with
the same disease, whatever it was. and the transies usually ended up as
schizos anyway. it just took them longer."
gears shifted. the floor slanted. jack was shoved hard against the rear
boards by the weight of the other men. he didn't answer until the
pressure had eased and his ribs were free to work for more than mere
survival.
he said, "you're way off, schizo. my hitting the road has nothing to do
with those split-heads. nothing, you understand? there's nothing foggy
or dreamy about me. i wouldn't be here with you guys if i hadn't been so
interested in a wasp catching a caterpillar that i never saw the bohas
sneaking up on me."
while jack described the little tragedy, the other allowed an
understanding smile to bend his lips. he seemed engrossed, however, and
when jack had finished, he said:
"that was probably an ammophila wasp. _sphex urnaria_ klug. lovely, but
vicious, little she-demon. injects the poison from her sting into the
caterpillar's central nerve cord. that not only paralyzes but preserves
it. the victim is always stowed away with another one in an underground
burrow. the wasp attaches one of her eggs to the body of a worm. when
the egg hatches, the grub eats both of the worms. they're alive, but
they're completely helpless to resist while their guts are gnawed away.
beautiful idea, isn't it?
"it's a habit common to many of those little devils: _sceliphron
cementarium_, _eumenes coarcta_, _eumenes fraterna_, _bembix spinolae_,
_pelopoeus_ ..."
jack's interest wandered. his informant was evidently one of those
transies who spent long hours in the libraries. they were ready at the
slightest chance to offer their encyclopaedic but often useless
knowledge. jack himself had abandoned his childhood bookwormishness. for
the last three years his days and evenings had worn themselves out on
the streets, passed in a parade of faces, flickered by in plate-glass
windows of restaurants and department stores and business offices, while
he hoped, hoped....
"did you say you spied on the camp?" jack interrupted the sonorous,
almost chanting flow of greek and latin.
"huh? oh, yeah. for two weeks. i saw plenty of transies trucked in, but
i never saw any taken out. maybe they left in the rocket."
"rocket?"
the youth was looking straight before him. his face was hard as bone,
but his voice trembled.
"yes. a big one. it landed and discharged about a dozen men."
"you nuts? there's been only one man-carrying rocket invented, and it
lands by parachute."
"i saw it, i tell you. and i'm not so nutty i'm seeing things that
aren't there. not yet, anyway!"
"maybe the government's got rockets it's not telling anybody about."
"then what connection could there be between rehabilitation camps and
rockets?"
jack shrugged and said, "your rocket story is fantastic."
"if somebody had told you four years ago that you'd be a bum hauled off
to a concentration camp, you'd have said that was fantastic too."
jack did not have time to reply. the truck stopped outside a high,
barbed wire fence. the gate swung open; the truck bounced down the bumpy
dirt road. jack saw some black-uniformed bohas seated by heavy machine
guns. they halted at another entrance; more barbed wire was passed. huge
dobermann pinschers looked at the transies with cold, steady eyes. the
dust of another section of road swirled up before they squeaked to a
standstill and the engine turned off.
this time, agents began to let down the back of the truck. they had to
pry the pitiful schizo's fingers loose from the wood with a crow-bar and
carry him off, still in his half-crouch.
a sergeant boomed orders. stiff and stumbling, the transies jumped off
the truck. they were swiftly lined up into squads and marched into the
enclosure and from there into a huge black barracks. within an hour each
man was stripped, had his head shaven, was showered, given a grey
uniform, and handed a tin plate and spoon and cup filled with beans and
bread and hot coffee.
afterwards, jack wandered around, free to look at the sandy soil
underfoot and barbed wire and the black uniforms of the sentries, and
free to ask himself where, where, wherewherewhere? twelve years ago it
had been, but where, where, where, was...?
iii
how easy it would have been to miss all this, if only he had obeyed his
father. but mr. crane was so ineffectual....
"jackie," he had said, "would you please go outside and play, or stay in
some other room. it's very difficult to discuss business while you're
whooping and screaming around, and i have a lot to discuss with mr.--"
"yes, daddy," jack said before his father mentioned his visitor's name.
but he was not jack crane in his game; he was uncas. the big chairs and
the divan were trees in his imaginative eyes. the huge easy chair in
which daddy's caller (jack thought of him only as "mister") sat was a
fallen log. he, uncas, meant to hide behind it in ambush.
mister did not bother him. he had smiled and said in a shrill voice that
he thought jack was a very nice boy. he wore a light grey-green palm
beach suit and carried a big brown leather briefcase that looked too
heavy for his soda straw-thin legs and arms. he was queer-looking
because his waist was so narrow and his back so humped. and when he took
off his tan panama hat, a white fuzz exploded from his scalp. his face
was pale as the moon in daylight. his broad smile showed teeth that jack
knew were false.
but the queerest thing about him was his thick spectacles, so heavily
tinted with rose that jack could not see the eyes behind them. the
afternoon light seemed to bounce off the lenses in such a manner that no
matter what angle you looked at them, you could not pierce them. and
they curved to hide the sides of his eyes completely.
mister had explained that he was an albino, and he needed the glasses to
dim the glare on his eyes. jack stopped being uncas for a minute to
listen. he had never seen an albino before, and, indeed, he did not know
what one was.
"i don't mind the youngster," said mister. "let him play here if he
wants to. he's developing his imagination, and he may be finding more
stimuli in this front room than he could in all of outdoors. we should
never cripple the fine gift of imagination in the young. imagination,
fancy, fantasy--or whatever you call it--is the essence and mainspring
of those scientists, musicians, painters, and poets who amount to
something in later life. they are adults who have remained youths."
mister addressed jack, "you're the last of the mohicans, and you're
about to sneak up on the french captain and tomahawk him, aren't you?"
jack blinked. he nodded his head. the opaque rose lenses set in mister's
face seemed to open a door into his naked grey skull.
the man said, "i want you to listen to me, jack. you'll forget my name,
which isn't important. but you will always remember me and my visit,
won't you?"
jack stared at the impenetrable lenses and nodded dumbly.
mister turned to jack's father. "let his fancy grow. it is a necessary
wish-fulfillment play. like all human young who are good for anything at
all, he is trying to find the lost door to the garden of eden. the
history of the great poets and men-of-action is the history of the
attempt to return to the realm that adam lost, the forgotten hesperides
of the mind, the avalon buried in our soul."
mr. crane put his fingertips together. "yes?"
"personally, i think that some day man will realize just what he is
searching for and will invent a machine that will enable the child to
project, just as a film throws an image on a screen, the visions in his
psyche.
"i see you're interested," he continued. "you would be, naturally, since
you're a professor of philosophy. now, let's call the toy a
specterscope, because through it the subject sees the spectres that
haunt his unconscious. ha! ha! but how does it work? if you'll keep it
to yourself, mr. crane, i'll tell you something: my native country's
scientists have developed a rather simple device, though they haven't
published anything about it in the scientific journals. let me give you
a brief explanation: light strikes the retina of the eye; the rods and
cones pass on impulses to the bipolar cells, which send them on to the
optic nerve, which goes to the brain ..."
"elementary and full of gaps," said jack's father.
"pardon me," said mister. "a bare outline should be enough. you'll be
able to fill in the details. very well. this specterscope breaks up the
light going into the eye in such a manner that the rods and cones
receive only a certain wavelength. i can't tell you what it is, except
that it's in the visual red. the scope also concentrates like a
burning-glass and magnifies the power of the light.
"result? a hitherto-undiscovered chemical in the visual purple of the
rods is activated and stimulates the optic nerve in a way we had not
guessed possible. an electrochemical stimulus then irritates the
subconscious until it fully wakes up.
"let me put it this way. the subconscious is not a matter of location
but of organization. there are billions of possible connections between
the neurons of the cortex. look at those potentialities as so many cards
in the same pack. shuffle the cards one way and you have the common
workaday _cogito, ergo sum_ mind. reshuffle them, and, bingo! you have
the combination of neurons, or cards, of the unconscious. the
specterscope does the redealing. when the subject gazes through it, he
sees for the first time the full impact and result of his underground
mind's workings in other perspectives than dreams or symbolical
behavior. the subjective garden of eden is resurrected. it is my
contention that this specterscope will some day be available to all
children.
"when that happens, mr. crane, you will understand that the world will
profit from man's secret wishes. earth will be a far better place.
paradise, sunken deep in every man, can be dredged out and set up
again."
"i don't know," said jack's father, stroking his chin thoughtfully with
a finger. "children like my son are too introverted as it is. give them
this psychological toy you suggest, and you would watch them grow, not
into the outside world, but into themselves. they would fester. man has
been expelled from the garden. his history is a long, painful climb
toward something different. it is something that is probably better than
the soft and flabby golden age. if man were to return, he would regress,
become worse than static, become infantile or even embryonic. he would
be smothered in the folds of his own dreams."
"perhaps," said the salesman. "but i think you have a very unusual child
here. he will go much farther than you may think. why? because he is
sensitive and has an imagination that only needs the proper guidance.
too many children become mere bourgeois ciphers with paunches and round
'o' minds full of tripe. they'll stay on earth. that is, i mean they'll
be stuck in the mud."
"you talk like no insurance salesman i've ever met."
"like all those who really want to sell, i'm a born psychologist,"
mister shrilled. "actually, i have an advantage. i have a ph.d. in
psychology. i would prefer staying at home for laboratory work, but
since i can help my starving children--i am not joking--so much more by
coming to a foreign land and working at something that will put food in
their mouths, i do it. i can't stand to see my little ones go hungry.
moreover," he said with a wave of his long-fingered hand, "this whole
planet is really a lab that beats anything within four walls."
"you spoke of famine. your accent--your name. you're a greek, aren't
you?"
"in a way," said mister. "my name, translated, means gracious or kindly
or well-meaning." his voice became brisker. "the translation is apropos.
i'm here to do you a service. now, about these monthly premiums ..."
jack shook himself and stepped out of the mold of fascination that
mister's glasses seemed to have poured around him. uncas again, he
crawled on all fours from chair to divan to stool to the fallen log
which the adults thought was an easy chair. he stuck his head from
behind it and sighted along the broomstick-musket at his father. he'd
shoot that white man dead and then take his scalp. he giggled at that,
because his father really didn't have any hairlock to take.
at that moment mister decided to take off his specs and polish them with
his breast-pocket handkerchief. while he answered one of mr. crane's
questions, he let them dangle from his fingers. accidentally, the lenses
were level with jack's gaze. one careless glance was enough to jerk his
eyes back to them. one glance stunned him so that he could not at once
understand that what he was seeing was not reality.
there was his father across the room. but it wasn't a room. it was a
space outdoors under the low branch of a tree whose trunk was so big it
was as wide as the wall had been. nor was the persian rug there. it was
replaced by a close-cropped bright green grass. here and there foot-high
flowers with bright yellow petals tipped in scarlet swayed beneath an
internal wind. close to mr. crane's feet a white horse no larger than a
fox terrier bit off the flaming end of a plant.
all those things were wonderful enough--but was that naked giant who
sprawled upon a moss-covered boulder father? no! yes! though the
features were no longer pinched and scored and pale, though they were
glowing and tanned and smooth like a young athlete's they were his
father's! even the thick, curly hair that fell down over a wide forehead
and the panther-muscled body could not hide his identity.
though it tore at his nerves, and though he was afraid that once he
looked away he would never again seize the vision, jack ripped his gaze
away from the rosy view.
the descent to the grey and rasping reality was so painful that tears
ran down his cheeks, and he gasped as if struck in the pit of the
stomach. how could beauty like that be all around him without his
knowing it?
he felt that he had been blind all his life until this moment and would
be forever eyeless again, an unbearable forever, if he did not look
through the glass again.
he stole another hurried glance, and the pain in his heart and stomach
went away, his insides became wrapped in a soft wind. he was lifted. he
was floating, a pale red, velvety air caressed him and buoyed him.
he saw his mother run from around the tree. that should have seemed
peculiar, because he had thought she was dead. but there she was, no
longer flat-walking and coughing and thin and wax-skinned, but
golden-brown and curvy and bouncy. she jumped at daddy and gave him a
long kiss. daddy didn't seem to mind that she had no clothes on. oh, it
was so wonderful. jack was drifting on a yielding and wine-tinted air
and warmed with a wind that seemed to swell him out like a happy
balloon....
suddenly he was falling, hurtling helplessly and sickeningly through a
void while a cold and drab blast gouged his skin and spun him around and
around. the world he had always known shoved hard against him. again he
felt the blow in the solar plexus and saw the grey tentacles of the
living reality reach for his heart.
jack looked up at the stranger, who was just about to put his spectacles
on the bridge of his long nose. his eyelids were closed. jack never did
see the pink eyes.
that didn't bother him. he had other things to think about. he crouched
beside the chair while his brain tried to move again, tried to engulf a
thought and failed because it could not become fluid enough to find the
idea that would move his tongue to shriek, _no! no! no!_
and when the salesman rose and placed his papers in his case and patted
jack on the head and bent his opaque rose spectacles at him and said
good-by and that he wouldn't be coming back because he was going out of
town to stay, jack was not able to move or say a thing. nor for a long
time after the door had closed could he break through the mass that
gripped him like hardened lava. by then, no amount of screams and
weeping would bring mister back. all his father could do was to call a
doctor who took the boy's temperature and gave him some pills.
iv
jack stood inside the wire and bent his neck back to watch a huge black
and silver oyster feel the dusk for a landing-field with its single
white foot and its orange toes. blindingly, lights sprang to attention
over the camp.
when jack had blinked his eyes back to normal, he could see over the
flat half-mile between the fence and the ship. it lay quiet and
glittering and smoking in the flood-beams. he could see the round door
in its side swing open. men began filing out. a truck rumbled across the
plain and pulled up beside the metal bulk. a very tall man stepped out
of the cab and halted upon the running board, from which he seemed to be
greeting the newcomers or giving them instructions. whatever he was
saying took so long that jack lost interest.
lately, he had not been able to focus his mind for any length of time
upon anything except that one event in the past. he wandered around and
whipped glances at his comrades' faces, noting listlessly that their
uniforms and shaved heads had improved their appearance. but nothing
would be able to chill the feverishness of their eyes.
whistles shrilled. jack jumped. his heart beat faster. he felt as if the
end of the quest were suddenly close. somebody would be around the
corner. in a minute that person would be facing him, and then ...
then, he reflected, and sagged with a wave of disappointment at the
thought, then there was nobody around the corner. it always happened
that way. besides, there weren't any corners in this camp. he had
reached the wall at the end of the alley. why didn't he stop looking?
sergeants lined the prisoners up four abreast preparatory to marching
them into the barracks. jack supposed it was time to turn in for the
night. he submitted to their barked orders and hard hands without
resentment. they seemed a long way off. for the ten thousandth time he
was thinking that this need not have happened.
if he had been man enough to grapple with himself, to wrestle as jacob
did with the angel and not let loose until he had felled the problem, he
could be teaching philosophy in a quiet little college, as his father
did. he had graduated from high school with only average marks, and
then, instead of going to college, as his father had so much wanted him
to, he had decided he would work a year. with his earnings, he would see
the world.
he had seen it, but when his money ran out he had not returned home. he
had drifted, taking jobs here and there, sleeping in flop-houses,
jungles, park benches, and freight cars.
when the newly created bureau of health and sanity had frozen jobs in an
effort to solve the transiency problem, jack had refused to work. he
knew that he would not be able to quit a job without being arrested at
once. like hundreds of thousands of other youths, he had begged and
stolen and hidden from the local police and the bohas.
even through all those years of misery and wandering, he had not once
admitted to himself the true nature of this fog-cottoned grail. he knew
it, and he did not know it. it was patrolling the edge of his mind,
circling a far-off periphery, recognizable by a crude silhouette but
nameless. any time he wanted to, he could have summoned it closer and
said, _you are it, and i know you, and i know what i am looking for. it
is...? is what? worthless? foolish? insane? a dream?_
jack had never had the courage to take that action. when it seemed the
thing was galloping closer, charging down upon him, he ran away. it must
stay on the horizon, moving on, always moving, staying out of his grasp.
"all you guys, for'ard 'arch!"
jack did not move. the truck from the rocket had come through a gate and
stopped by the transies, and about fifty men were getting off the back.
the man behind jack bumped into him. jack paid him no attention. he did
not move. he squinted at the group who had come from the rocket. they
were very tall, hump-shouldered, and dressed in light grey-green palm
beach suits and tan panama hats. each held a brown leather briefcase at
the end of a long, thin arm. each wore on the bridge of his long nose a
pair of rose-colored glasses.
a cry broke hoarsely from the transies. some of those in front of jack
fell to their knees as if a sudden poison had paralyzed their legs. they
called names and stretched out open hands. a boy by jack's side sprawled
face-down on the sand while he uttered over and over again, "mr.
pelopoeus! mr. pelopoeus!"
the name meant nothing to jack. he did feel repulsed at seeing the
fellow turn on his side, bend his neck forward, bring his clenched fists
up against his chest, and jackknife his legs against his arms. he had
seen it many times before in the transie jungles, but he had never
gotten over the sickness it had first caused him.
he turned away and came almost nose to nose with one of the men from the
rocket. he had put down his briefcase so it rested against his leg and
taken a white handkerchief out of his breast pocket to wipe the dust
from his lenses. his lids were squeezed shut as if he found the lights
unbearable.
jack stared and could not move while a name that the boy behind him had
been crying out slowly worked its way through his consciousness.
suddenly, like the roar of a flashflood that is just rounding the bend
of a dry gulch, the syllables struck him. he lunged forward and clutched
at the spectacles in the man's hand. at the same time he yelled over and
over the words that had filled out the blank in his memory.
"mr. eumenes! mr. eumenes!"
a sergeant cursed and slammed his fist into jack's face. jack fell down,
flat on his back. though his jaw felt as if it were torn loose from its
hinge, he rolled over on his side, raised himself on his hands and
knees, and began to get up to his feet.
"stand still!" bellowed the sergeant. "stay in formation or you'll get
more of the same!"
jack shook his head until it cleared. he crouched and held out his hands
toward the man, but he did not move his feet. over and over,
half-chanting, half-crooning, he said, "mr. eumenes! the glasses!
please, mr. eumenes, the glasses!"
the forty-nine mr. eumenae-and-otherwise looked incuriously with
impenetrable rosy eyes. the fiftieth put the white handkerchief back in
his pocket. his mouth opened. false teeth gleamed. with his free hand he
took off his hat and waved it at the crowd and bowed.
his tilted head showed a white fuzzlike hair that shot up over his pale
scalp. his gestures were both comic and terrifying. the hat and the
inclination of his body said far more than words could. they said,
_good-by forever, and bon voyage!_
then mr. eumenes straightened up and opened his lids.
at first, the sockets looked as if they held no eyeballs, as if they
were empty of all but shadows.
jack saw them from a distance. mr. eumenes-or-his-twin was shooting away
faster and faster and becoming smaller and smaller. no! he himself was.
he was rocketing away within his own body. he was falling down a deep
well.
he, jack crane, was a hollow shaft down which he slipped and screamed,
away, away, from the world outside. it was like seeing from the wrong
end of a pair of binoculars that lengthened and lengthened while the man
with the long-sought-for treasure in his hand flew in the opposite
direction as if he had been connected to the horizon by a rubber band
and somebody had released it and he was flying towards it, away from
jack.
even as this happened, as he knew vaguely that his muscles were locking
into the posture of a beggar, hands out, pleading, face twisted into an
agony of asking, lips repeating his croon-chant, he saw what had
occurred.
the realization was like the sudden, blinding, and at the same time
clarifying light that sometimes comes to epileptics just as they are
going into a seizure. it was the thought that he had kept away on the
horizon of his mind, the thought that now charged in on him with long
leaps and bounds and then stopped and sat on its haunches and grinned at
him while its long tongue lolled.
of course, he should have known all these years what it was. he should
have known that mr. eumenes was the worst thing in the world for him. he
had known it, but, like a drug addict, he had refused to admit it. he
had searched for the man. yet he had known it would be fatal to find
him. the rose-colored spectacles would swing gates that should never be
fully open. and he should have guessed _what_ and _who_ mr. eumenes was
when that encyclopedic fellow in the truck had singsonged those names.
how could he have been so stupid? stupid? it was easy! he had _wanted_
to be stupid! and how could the mr. eumenes-or-otherwise have used such
obvious giveaway names? it was a measure of their contempt for the
humans around them and of their own grim wit. look at all the double
entendres the salesman had given his father, and his father had never
suspected. even the head of the bureau of health and sanity had been
terrifyingly blase about it.
dr. vespa. he had thrown his name like a gauntlet to humanity, and
humanity had stared idiotically at it and never guessed its meaning.
vespa was a good italian name. jack didn't know what it meant, but he
supposed that it had the same meaning as the latin. he remembered it
from his high school class.
as for his not encountering the salesman until now, he had been lucky.
if he had run across him during his search, he would have been denied
the glasses, as now. and the shock would have made him unable to cry out
and betray the man. he would have done what he was so helplessly doing
at this moment, and he would have been carted off to an institution.
how many other transies had seen that unforgettable face on the streets,
the end of their search, and gone at once into that state that made them
legal prey of the bohas?
that was almost his last rational thought. he could no longer feel his
flesh. a thin red curtain was falling between him and his senses.
everywhere it billowed out beneath him and eased his fall. everywhere it
swirled and softened the outlines of things that were streaking by--a
large tree that he remembered seeing in his living room, a naked giant,
his father, leaning against it and eating an apple, and a delicate
little white creature cropping flowers.
yet all this while he lived in two worlds. one was the passage downwards
towards the garden of eden. the other was that hemisphere in which he
had dwelt so reluctantly, the one he now perceived through the
thickening red veil of his sight and other senses.
they were not yet gone. he could feel the hands of the black-clad
officers lifting him up and laying him upon some hard substance that
rocked and dumped. every lurch and thud was only dimly felt. then he was
placed upon something softer and carried into what he vaguely sensed was
the interior of one of the barracks.
some time later--he didn't know or care when, for he had lost all
conception or even definition of time--he looked up the deep
everlengthening shaft of himself into the eyes of another mr. eumenes or
mr. sphex or dr. vespa or whatever he called himself. he was in white
and wore a stethoscope around his neck.
beside him stood another of his own kind. this one wore lipstick and a
nurse's cap. she carried a tray on which were several containers. one
container held a large and sharp scalpel. the other held an egg. it was
about twice the size of a hen's egg.
jack saw all this just before the veil took on another shade of red and
blurred completely his vision of the outside. but the final thickening
did not keep him from seeing that doctor eumenes was staring down at him
as if he were peering into a dusky burrow. and jack could make out the
eyes. they were large, much larger than they should have been at the
speed with which jack was receding. they were not the pale pink of an
albino's. they were black from corner to corner and built of a dozen or
so hexagons whose edges caught the light.
they twinkled.
like jewels.
or the eyes of an enormous and evolved wasp.
